\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c $Id: netcdf-c.texi,v 1.47 2007/01/06 17:13:43 russ Exp $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename netcdf-c.info
@setcontentsaftertitlepage
@settitle NetCDF C Interface Guide
@c Combine the variable, concept, and function indices.
@synindex vr cp
@synindex fn cp
@c %**end of header

@include version-c.texi
@include defines.texi

@ifinfo
@dircategory netCDF scientific data format
@direntry
* netcdf-c: (netcdf-c).         @value{c-man}
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title @value{c-man}
@subtitle NetCDF Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle Last Updated @value{UPDATED}
@author Russ Rew, Glenn Davis, Steve Emmerson, and Harvey Davies
@author Unidata Program Center
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top, Use of the NetCDF Library, (dir), (dir)
@top @value{c-man}
@end ifnottex

This document describes the C interface to the netCDF library; it
applies to netCDF version @value{VERSION} and was last updated on
@value{UPDATED}.

For a complete description of the netCDF format and utilities see 
@ref{Top, @value{n-man},, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

@menu
* Use of the NetCDF Library::   
* Datasets::                    
* Dimensions::                  
* Variables::                   
* Attributes::                  
* Summary of C Interface::      
* NetCDF 2 C Transition Guide::  
* Error Codes::                 
* Combined Index::              

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Use of the NetCDF Library

* Creating::                    Creating a NetCDF Dataset                    
* Reading Known ::              Reading a NetCDF Dataset with Known Names        
* Reading Unknown ::            Reading a netCDF Dataset with Unknown Names
* Adding::                      Adding New Dimensions, Variables, Attributes        
* Errors::                      Error Handling        
* Compiling::                   Compiling and Linking with the NetCDF Library        

Datasets

* Interface Descriptions::      What's in the Function Documentation
* nc_strerror::                 Get error string from error code
* nc_inq_libvers::              Get netCDF library version
* nc_create::                   Create a Dataset
* nc__create::                  Create a Dataset with Performance Tuning
* nc_open::                     Open a Dataset
* nc__open::                    Open a Dataset with Performance Tuning
* nc_redef::                    Put a Dataset into Define Mode
* nc_enddef::                   Leave Define Mode
* nc__enddef::                  Leave Define Mode with Performance Tuning
* nc_close::                    Close a Dataset
* nc_inq Family::               Inquire about a Dataset
* nc_sync::                     Synchronize a Dataset to Disk
* nc_abort::                    Back Out of Recent Definitions
* nc_set_fill::                 Set Fill Mode for Writes
* nc_set_default_format::       Change the default output format

Dimensions

* Dimensions Introduction::     Rules for Dimensions
* nc_def_dim::                  Create a Dimension
* nc_inq_dimid::                Get a Dimension ID from Its Name
* nc_inq_dim Family::           Inquire about a Dimension
* nc_rename_dim::               Rename a Dimension

Variables

* Variable Introduction::       What are Variables?
* Variable Types::              Floating point, integer, and all that
* nc_def_var::                  Create a Variable
* nc_inq_varid::                Get a Variable ID from Its Name
* nc_inq_var::                  Get Information about a Variable from Its ID
* nc_put_var1_ type::           Write a Single Data Value
* nc_put_var_ type::            Write an Entire Variable
* nc_put_vara_ type::           Write an Array of Values
* nc_put_vars_ type::           Write a Subsampled Array of Values
* nc_put_varm_ type::           Write a Mapped Array of Values
* nc_get_var1_ type::           Read a Single Data Value
* nc_get_var_ type::            Read an Entire Variable
* nc_get_vara_ type::           Read an Array of Values
* nc_get_vars_ type::           Read a Subsampled Array of Values
* nc_get_varm_ type::           Read a Mapped Array of Values
* Strings::                     Reading and Writing Character String Values
* Fill Values::                 What's Written Where there's No Data?
* nc_rename_var::               Rename a Variable

Attributes

* Attributes Introduction::     What are Attributes?
* nc_put_att_ type::            Write an Attribute
* nc_inq_att Family::           Get Information about an Attribute
* nc_get_att_ type::            Read an Attribute
* nc_copy_att::                 Copy an Attribute
* nc_rename_att::               Rename an Attribute
* nc_del_att::                  Delete an Attribute

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Use of the NetCDF Library, Datasets, Top, Top
@chapter Use of the NetCDF Library
@findex nc_create, typical use
@findex nc_def_dim, typical use
@findex nc_def_var, typical use
@findex nc_put_att, typical use
@findex nc_enddef, typical use
@findex nc_put_var, typical use
@findex nc_close, typical use
@cindex creating a dataset
@cindex abnormal termination
@cindex call sequence, typical
@cindex templates, code
@cindex code templates
@vindex NC_SHARE, and buffering

You can use the netCDF library without knowing about all of the netCDF
interface. If you are creating a netCDF dataset, only a handful of
routines are required to define the necessary dimensions, variables,
and attributes, and to write the data to the netCDF dataset. (Even
less are needed if you use the ncgen utility to create the dataset
before running a program using netCDF library calls to write data.)
Similarly, if you are writing software to access data stored in a
particular netCDF object, only a small subset of the netCDF library is
required to open the netCDF dataset and access the data. Authors of
generic applications that access arbitrary netCDF datasets need to be
familiar with more of the netCDF library.

In this chapter we provide templates of common sequences of netCDF
calls needed for common uses. For clarity we present only the names of
routines; omit declarations and error checking; omit the type-specific
suffixes of routine names for variables and attributes; indent
statements that are typically invoked multiple times; and use ... to
represent arbitrary sequences of other statements. Full parameter
lists are described in later chapters.

@menu
* Creating::                    Creating a NetCDF Dataset                    
* Reading Known ::              Reading a NetCDF Dataset with Known Names        
* Reading Unknown ::            Reading a netCDF Dataset with Unknown Names
* Adding::                      Adding New Dimensions, Variables, Attributes        
* Errors::                      Error Handling        
* Compiling::                   Compiling and Linking with the NetCDF Library        
@end menu

@node Creating, Reading Known , Use of the NetCDF Library, Use of the NetCDF Library
@section Creating a NetCDF Dataset

Here is a typical sequence of netCDF calls used to create a new netCDF dataset:

@example
    nc_create           /* create netCDF dataset: enter define mode */
         ... 
       nc_def_dim       /* define dimensions: from name and length */
         ... 
       nc_def_var       /* define variables: from name, type, ... */
         ... 
       nc_put_att       /* put attribute: assign attribute values */
         ... 
    nc_enddef           /* end definitions: leave define mode */
         ... 
       nc_put_var       /* provide values for variables */
         ... 
    nc_close            /* close: save new netCDF dataset */
@end example

Only one call is needed to create a netCDF dataset, at which point you
will be in the first of two netCDF modes. When accessing an open
netCDF dataset, it is either in define mode or data mode. In define
mode, you can create dimensions, variables, and new attributes, but
you cannot read or write variable data. In data mode, you can access
data and change existing attributes, but you are not permitted to
create new dimensions, variables, or attributes.

One call to nc_def_dim is needed for each dimension
created. Similarly, one call to nc_def_var is needed for each variable
creation, and one call to a member of the nc_put_att family is needed
for each attribute defined and assigned a value. To leave define mode
and enter data mode, call nc_enddef.

Once in data mode, you can add new data to variables, change old
values, and change values of existing attributes (so long as the
attribute changes do not require more storage space). Single values
may be written to a netCDF variable with one of the members of the
nc_put_var1 family, depending on what type of data you have to
write. All the values of a variable may be written at once with one of
the members of the nc_put_var family. Arrays or array cross-sections
of a variable may be written using members of the nc_put_vara
family. Subsampled array sections may be written using members of the
nc_put_vars family. Mapped array sections may be written using members
of the nc_put_varm family. (Subsampled and mapped access are general
forms of data access that are explained later.)

Finally, you should explicitly close all netCDF datasets that have
been opened for writing by calling nc_close. By default, access to the
file system is buffered by the netCDF library. If a program terminates
abnormally with netCDF datasets open for writing, your most recent
modifications may be lost. This default buffering of data is disabled
by setting the NC_SHARE flag when opening the dataset. But even if
this flag is set, changes to attribute values or changes made in
define mode are not written out until nc_sync or nc_close is called.

@node Reading Known , Reading Unknown , Creating, Use of the NetCDF Library
@section Reading a NetCDF Dataset with Known Names
@findex nc_inq_dimid, typical use
@findex nc_inq_varid, typical use
@findex nc_get_att, typical use
@findex nc_get_var, typical use
@cindex reading netCDF dataset with known names

Here we consider the case where you know the names of not only the
netCDF datasets, but also the names of their dimensions, variables,
and attributes. (Otherwise you would have to do "inquire" calls.) The
order of typical C calls to read data from those variables in a netCDF
dataset is:

@example
    nc_open                /* open existing netCDF dataset */
         ... 
       nc_inq_dimid        /* get dimension IDs */
         ... 
       nc_inq_varid        /* get variable IDs */
         ... 
       nc_get_att          /* get attribute values */
         ... 
       nc_get_var          /* get values of variables */
         ... 
    nc_close               /* close netCDF dataset */
@end example

First, a single call opens the netCDF dataset, given the dataset name,
and returns a netCDF ID that is used to refer to the open netCDF
dataset in all subsequent calls.

Next, a call to nc_inq_dimid for each dimension of interest gets the
dimension ID from the dimension name. Similarly, each required
variable ID is determined from its name by a call to nc_inq_varid Once
variable IDs are known, variable attribute values can be retrieved
using the netCDF ID, the variable ID, and the desired attribute name
as input to a member of the nc_get_att family (typically
nc_get_att_text or nc_get_att_double) for each desired
attribute. Variable data values can be directly accessed from the
netCDF dataset with calls to members of the nc_get_var1 family for
single values, the nc_get_var family for entire variables, or various
other members of the nc_get_vara, nc_get_vars, or nc_get_varm families
for array, subsampled or mapped access.

Finally, the netCDF dataset is closed with nc_close. There is no need
to close a dataset open only for reading.

@node Reading Unknown , Adding, Reading Known , Use of the NetCDF Library
@section Reading a netCDF Dataset with Unknown Names
@findex nc_inq, typical use
@findex nc_inq_dim, typical use
@findex nc_inq_var, typical use
@findex nc_inq_att, typical use
@findex nc_get_att, typical use
@findex nc_get_attname, typical use
@findex nc_get_var, typical use
@cindex reading netCDF dataset with unknown names

It is possible to write programs (e.g., generic software) which do
such things as processing every variable, without needing to know in
advance the names of these variables. Similarly, the names of
dimensions and attributes may be unknown.

Names and other information about netCDF objects may be obtained from
netCDF datasets by calling inquire functions. These return information
about a whole netCDF dataset, a dimension, a variable, or an
attribute. The following template illustrates how they are used:

@example
    nc_open                   /* open existing netCDF dataset */
      ... 
    nc_inq                    /* find out what is in it */
         ... 
       nc_inq_dim             /* get dimension names, lengths */
         ... 
       nc_inq_var             /* get variable names, types, shapes */
            ... 
          nc_inq_attname      /* get attribute names */
            ... 
          nc_inq_att          /* get attribute types and lengths */
            ... 
          nc_get_att          /* get attribute values */
            ... 
       nc_get_var             /* get values of variables */
         ... 
    nc_close                  /* close netCDF dataset */
@end example

As in the previous example, a single call opens the existing netCDF
dataset, returning a netCDF ID. This netCDF ID is given to the nc_inq
routine, which returns the number of dimensions, the number of
variables, the number of global attributes, and the ID of the
unlimited dimension, if there is one.

All the inquire functions are inexpensive to use and require no I/O,
since the information they provide is stored in memory when a netCDF
dataset is first opened.

Dimension IDs use consecutive integers, beginning at 0. Also
dimensions, once created, cannot be deleted. Therefore, knowing the
number of dimension IDs in a netCDF dataset means knowing all the
dimension IDs: they are the integers 0, 1, 2, ...up to the number of
dimensions. For each dimension ID, a call to the inquire function
nc_inq_dim returns the dimension name and length.

Variable IDs are also assigned from consecutive integers 0, 1, 2,
... up to the number of variables. These can be used in nc_inq_var
calls to find out the names, types, shapes, and the number of
attributes assigned to each variable.

Once the number of attributes for a variable is known, successive
calls to nc_inq_attname return the name for each attribute given the
netCDF ID, variable ID, and attribute number. Armed with the attribute
name, a call to nc_inq_att returns its type and length. Given the type
and length, you can allocate enough space to hold the attribute
values. Then a call to a member of the nc_get_att family returns the
attribute values.

Once the IDs and shapes of netCDF variables are known, data values can
be accessed by calling a member of the nc_get_var1 family for single
values, or members of the nc_get_var, nc_get_vara, nc_get_vars, or
nc_get_varm for various kinds of array access.

@node Adding, Errors, Reading Unknown , Use of the NetCDF Library
@section Adding New Dimensions, Variables, Attributes
@findex nc_redef, typical use
@findex nc_def_dim, typical use
@findex nc_put_att, typical use
@cindex dimensions, adding
@cindex variables, adding
@cindex attributes, adding
@cindex aborting define mode
@cindex aborting definitions
@cindex adding dimensions
@cindex adding attributes
@cindex adding variables
@cindex attributes, deleting, introduction
@cindex NC_SHARE

An existing netCDF dataset can be extensively altered. New dimensions,
variables, and attributes can be added or existing ones renamed, and
existing attributes can be deleted. Existing dimensions, variables,
and attributes can be renamed. The following code template lists a
typical sequence of calls to add new netCDF components to an existing
dataset:

@example
    nc_open             /* open existing netCDF dataset */
      ... 
    nc_redef            /* put it into define mode */
        ... 
      nc_def_dim        /* define additional dimensions (if any) */
        ... 
      nc_def_var        /* define additional variables (if any) */
        ... 
      nc_put_att        /* define additional attributes (if any) */
        ... 
    nc_enddef           /* check definitions, leave define mode */
        ... 
      nc_put_var        /* provide values for new variables */
        ... 
    nc_close            /* close netCDF dataset */
@end example

A netCDF dataset is first opened by the nc_open call. This call puts
the open dataset in data mode, which means existing data values can be
accessed and changed, existing attributes can be changed (so long as
they do not grow), but nothing can be added. To add new netCDF
dimensions, variables, or attributes you must enter define mode, by
calling nc_redef. In define mode, call nc_def_dim to define new
dimensions, nc_def_var to define new variables, and a member of the
nc_put_attfamily to assign new attributes to variables or enlarge old
attributes.

You can leave define mode and reenter data mode, checking all the new
definitions for consistency and committing the changes to disk, by
calling nc_enddef. If you do not wish to reenter data mode, just call
nc_close, which will have the effect of first calling nc_enddef.

Until the nc_enddef call, you may back out of all the redefinitions
made in define mode and restore the previous state of the netCDF
dataset by calling nc_abort. You may also use the nc_abort call to
restore the netCDF dataset to a consistent state if the call to
nc_enddef fails. If you have called nc_close from definition mode and
the implied call to nc_enddef fails, nc_abort will automatically be
called to close the netCDF dataset and leave it in its previous
consistent state (before you entered define mode).

At most one process should have a netCDF dataset open for writing at
one time. The library is designed to provide limited support for
multiple concurrent readers with one writer, via disciplined use of
the nc_sync function and the NC_SHARE flag. If a writer makes changes
in define mode, such as the addition of new variables, dimensions, or
attributes, some means external to the library is necessary to prevent
readers from making concurrent accesses and to inform readers to call
nc_sync before the next access.

@node Errors, Compiling, Adding, Use of the NetCDF Library
@section Error Handling
@findex nc_strerror, introduction
@cindex error handling
@cindex write errors

The netCDF library provides the facilities needed to handle errors in
a flexible way. Each netCDF function returns an integer status
value. If the returned status value indicates an error, you may handle
it in any way desired, from printing an associated error message and
exiting to ignoring the error indication and proceeding (not
recommended!). For simplicity, the examples in this guide check the
error status and call a separate function, handle_err(), to handle any
errors. One possible definition of handle_err() can be found withdin the
documentation of nc_strerror (@pxref{nc_strerror}).

The nc_strerror function is available to convert a returned integer
error status into an error message string.

Occasionally, low-level I/O errors may occur in a layer below the
netCDF library. For example, if a write operation causes you to exceed
disk quotas or to attempt to write to a device that is no longer
available, you may get an error from a layer below the netCDF library,
but the resulting write error will still be reflected in the returned
status value.

@node Compiling,  , Errors, Use of the NetCDF Library
@section Compiling and Linking with the NetCDF Library
@cindex linking to netCDF library
@cindex compiling with netCDF library

Details of how to compile and link a program that uses the netCDF C or
FORTRAN interfaces differ, depending on the operating system, the
available compilers, and where the netCDF library and include files
are installed. Nevertheless, we provide here examples of how to
compile and link a program that uses the netCDF library on a Unix
platform, so that you can adjust these examples to fit your
installation.

Every C file that references netCDF functions or constants must
contain an appropriate #include statement before the first such
reference:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
@end example

Unless the netcdf.h file is installed in a standard directory where
the C compiler always looks, you must use the -I option when invoking
the compiler, to specify a directory where netcdf.h is installed, for
example:

@example
cc -c -I/usr/local/netcdf/include myprogram.c
@end example

Alternatively, you could specify an absolute path name in the #include
statement, but then your program would not compile on another platform
where netCDF is installed in a different location.

Unless the netCDF library is installed in a standard directory where
the linker always looks, you must use the -L and -l options to link an
object file that uses the netCDF library. For example:

@example
cc -o myprogram myprogram.o -L/usr/local/netcdf/lib -lnetcdf
@end example

Alternatively, you could specify an absolute path name for the
library:

@example
cc -o myprogram myprogram.o -l/usr/local/netcdf/lib/libnetcdf.a
@end example

@node Datasets, Dimensions, Use of the NetCDF Library, Top
@chapter Datasets
@cindex datasets, overview

This chapter presents the interfaces of the netCDF functions that deal
with a netCDF dataset or the whole netCDF library.

A netCDF dataset that has not yet been opened can only be referred to
by its dataset name. Once a netCDF dataset is opened, it is referred
to by a netCDF ID, which is a small nonnegative integer returned when
you create or open the dataset. A netCDF ID is much like a file
descriptor in C or a logical unit number in FORTRAN. In any single
program, the netCDF IDs of distinct open netCDF datasets are
distinct. A single netCDF dataset may be opened multiple times and
will then have multiple distinct netCDF IDs; however at most one of
the open instances of a single netCDF dataset should permit
writing. When an open netCDF dataset is closed, the ID is no longer
associated with a netCDF dataset.

Functions that deal with the netCDF library include:
@itemize

@item
Get version of library. 

@item
Get error message corresponding to a returned error code. 
@end itemize

The operations supported on a netCDF dataset as a single object are:
@itemize

@item
Create, given dataset name and whether to overwrite or not. 

@item
Open for access, given dataset name and read or write intent. 

@item
Put into define mode, to add dimensions, variables, or attributes.

@item
Take out of define mode, checking consistency of additions. 

@item
Close, writing to disk if required. 

@item
Inquire about the number of dimensions, number of variables, number of
global attributes, and ID of the unlimited dimension, if any.

@item
Synchronize to disk to make sure it is current. 

@item
Set and unset nofill mode for optimized sequential writes. 

@item
After a summary of conventions used in describing the netCDF
interfaces, the rest of this chapter presents a detailed description
of the interfaces for these operations.
@end itemize

@menu
* Interface Descriptions::      What's in the Function Documentation
* nc_strerror::                 Get error string from error code
* nc_inq_libvers::              Get netCDF library version
* nc_create::                   Create a Dataset
* nc__create::                  Create a Dataset with Performance Tuning
* nc_open::                     Open a Dataset
* nc__open::                    Open a Dataset with Performance Tuning
* nc_redef::                    Put a Dataset into Define Mode
* nc_enddef::                   Leave Define Mode
* nc__enddef::                  Leave Define Mode with Performance Tuning
* nc_close::                    Close a Dataset
* nc_inq Family::               Inquire about a Dataset
* nc_sync::                     Synchronize a Dataset to Disk
* nc_abort::                    Back Out of Recent Definitions
* nc_set_fill::                 Set Fill Mode for Writes
* nc_set_default_format::       Change the default output format
@end menu

@node Interface Descriptions, nc_strerror, Datasets, Datasets
@section NetCDF Library Interface Descriptions
@cindex interface descriptions

Each interface description for a particular netCDF function in this
and later chapters contains:

@itemize

@item
a description of the purpose of the function; 

@item
a C function prototype that presents the type and order of the formal
parameters to the function;

@item
a description of each formal parameter in the C interface; 

@item
a list of possible error conditions; and 

@item
an example of a C program fragment calling the netCDF function (and
perhaps other netCDF functions).
@end itemize

The examples follow a simple convention for error handling, always
checking the error status returned from each netCDF function call and
calling a handle_error function in case an error was detected. For an
example of such a function, see @ref{nc_strerror}.

@node nc_strerror, nc_inq_libvers, Interface Descriptions, Datasets
@section Get error message corresponding to error status: nc_strerror 
@findex nc_strerror
@findex handle_err
@cindex error codes
@cindex nc_strerror, example

The function nc_strerror returns a static reference to an error
message string corresponding to an integer netCDF error status or to a
system error number, presumably returned by a previous call to some
other netCDF function. The list of netCDF error status codes is
available in the appropriate include file for each language binding.

@heading Usage 
@example
const char * nc_strerror(int ncerr);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncerr
An error status that might have been returned from a previous call to
some netCDF function.
@end table

@heading Errors

If you provide an invalid integer error status that does not
correspond to any netCDF error message or or to any system error
message (as understood by the system strerror function), nc_strerror
returns a string indicating that there is no such error status.

@heading Example 

Here is an example of a simple error handling function that uses
nc_strerror to print the error message corresponding to the netCDF
error status returned from any netCDF function call and then exit:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
void handle_error(int status) @{
if (status != NC_NOERR) @{
   fprintf(stderr, "%s\n", nc_strerror(status));
   exit(-1);
   @}
@}
@end example

@node nc_inq_libvers, nc_create, nc_strerror, Datasets
@section Get netCDF library version: nc_inq_libvers
@findex nc_inq_libvers
@cindex version of netCDF, discovering
@cindex netCDF library version
@cindex nc_inq_libvers, example

The function nc_inq_libvers returns a string identifying the version
of the netCDF library, and when it was built.

@heading Usage 
@example
const char * nc_inq_libvers(void);
@end example

@heading Errors 

This function takes no arguments, and thus no errors are possible in
its invocation.

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq_libvers to print the version of the
netCDF library with which the program is linked:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
   printf("%s\n", nc_inq_libvers());
@end example

@node nc_create, nc__create, nc_inq_libvers, Datasets
@section Create a NetCDF Dataset: nc_create 
@findex nc_create
@cindex nc_create, example
@cindex nc_create, flags
@vindex NC_NOCLOBBER
@vindex NC_CLOBBER
@vindex NC_SHARE
@vindex NC_64BIT_OFFSET

This function creates a new netCDF dataset, returning a netCDF ID that
can subsequently be used to refer to the netCDF dataset in other
netCDF function calls. The new netCDF dataset opened for write access
and placed in define mode, ready for you to add dimensions, variables,
and attributes.

A creation mode flag specifies:

@itemize

@item
whether to overwrite any existing dataset with the same name,
@item
whether access to the dataset is shared,
@item
whether this file should be in netCDF classic format (the default), or
the new 64-bit offset format.
@end itemize

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc_create (const char* path, int cmode, int *ncidp);
@end example

@table @code
@item path
The file name of the new netCDF dataset.
 
@item cmode
The creation mode flag. The following flags are available:
NC_NOCLOBBER, NC_SHARE, and NC_64BIT_OFFSET.

Setting NC_NOCLOBBER means you do not want to clobber (overwrite) an
existing dataset; an error (NC_EEXIST) is returned if the specified
dataset already exists.

The NC_SHARE flag is appropriate when one process may be writing the
dataset and one or more other processes reading the dataset
concurrently; it means that dataset accesses are not buffered and
caching is limited. Since the buffering scheme is optimized for
sequential access, programs that do not access data sequentially may
see some performance improvement by setting the NC_SHARE flag.

Setting NC_64BIT_OFFSET causes netCDF to create a 64-bit offset format
file, instead of a netCDF classic format file. The 64-bit offset
format imposes far fewer restrictions on very large (i.e. over 2 GB)
data files. @xref{Large File Support,,, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

A zero value (defined for convenience as NC_CLOBBER) specifies the
default behavior: overwrite any existing dataset with the same file
name and buffer and cache accesses for efficiency. The dataset will be
in netCDF classic format. @xref{NetCDF Classic Format Limitations,,,
netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

@item ncidp
Pointer to location where returned netCDF ID is to be stored.
@end table

@heading Errors 
nc_create returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
Passing a dataset name that includes a directory that does not exist.
@item
Specifying a dataset name of a file that exists and also specifying
NC_NOCLOBBER.
@item
Specifying a meaningless value for the creation mode.
@item
Attempting to create a netCDF dataset in a directory where you don't
have permission to create files.
@end itemize

@heading Examples

In this example we create a netCDF dataset named foo.nc; we want the
dataset to be created in the current directory only if a dataset with
that name does not already exist:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

In this example we create a netCDF dataset named foo_large.nc. It will
be in the 64-bit offset format.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER | NC_64BIT_OFFSET, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

A variant of nc_create, nc__create (note the double underscore) allows
users to specify two tuning parameters for the file that it is
creating. These tuning parameters are not written to the data file,
they are only used for so long as the file remains open after an
nc__create.

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc__create(const char *path, int cmode, size_t initialsz,
               size_t *chunksizehintp, int *ncidp);
@end example


@table @code
@item path
The file name of the new netCDF dataset.
 
@item cmode
The creation mode flag. The following flags are available:
NC_NOCLOBBER, NC_SHARE, and NC_64BIT_OFFSET.

Setting NC_NOCLOBBER means you do not want to clobber (overwrite) an
existing dataset; an error (NC_EEXIST) is returned if the specified
dataset already exists.

The NC_SHARE flag is appropriate when one process may be writing the
dataset and one or more other processes reading the dataset
concurrently; it means that dataset accesses are not buffered and
caching is limited. Since the buffering scheme is optimized for
sequential access, programs that do not access data sequentially may
see some performance improvement by setting the NC_SHARE flag.

Setting NC_64BIT_OFFSET causes netCDF to create a 64-bit offset format
file, instead of a netCDF classic format file. The 64-bit offset
format imposes far fewer restrictions on very large (i.e. over 2 GB)
data files. @xref{Large File Support,,, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

A zero value (defined for convenience as NC_CLOBBER) specifies the
default behavior: overwrite any existing dataset with the same file
name and buffer and cache accesses for efficiency. The dataset will be
in netCDF classic format. @xref{NetCDF Classic Format Limitations,,,
netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

@item initialsz
On some systems, and with custom I/O layers, it may be advantageous to
set the size of the output file at creation time. This parameter sets
the initial size of the file at creation time.

@item chunksizehintp
The argument referenced by chunksizehintp controls a space versus time
tradeoff, memory allocated in the netcdf library versus number of system
calls.

Because of internal requirements, the value may not be set to exactly
the value requested. The actual value chosen is returned by reference.

Using the value NC_SIZEHINT_DEFAULT causes the library to choose a
default. How the system chooses the default depends on the system. On
many systems, the "preferred I/O block size" is available from the
stat() system call, struct stat member st_blksize. If this is
available it is used. Lacking that, twice the system pagesize is used.

Lacking a call to discover the system pagesize, we just set default
chunksize to 8192.

The chunksize is a property of a given open netcdf descriptor
ncid, it is not a persistent property of the netcdf dataset.

@item ncidp
Pointer to location where returned netCDF ID is to be stored.
@end table

@heading Errors 
nc__create returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
Passing a dataset name that includes a directory that does not exist.
@item
Specifying a dataset name of a file that exists and also specifying
NC_NOCLOBBER.
@item
Specifying a meaningless value for the creation mode.
@item
Attempting to create a netCDF dataset in a directory where you don't
have permission to create files.
@end itemize

@heading Examples

In this example we create a netCDF dataset named foo.nc; we want the
dataset to be created in the current directory only if a dataset with
that name does not already exist:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

In this example we create a netCDF dataset named foo_large.nc; we want the
dataset to be created in the current directory only if a dataset with
that name does not already exist. We also specify that chunksize and
initial size for the file.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
int intialsz = 2048;
int *chunksize;
   ... 
*chunksize = 1024;
status = nc__create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, initialsz, chunksize, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc__create, nc_open, nc_create, Datasets
@section Create a NetCDF Dataset With Performance Options: nc__create 
@findex nc__create
@cindex nc__create, example
@cindex nc__create, flags
@vindex NC_NOCLOBBER
@vindex NC_CLOBBER
@vindex NC_SHARE
@vindex NC_64BIT_OFFSET

This function is a variant of nc_create, nc__create (note the double
underscore) allows users to specify two tuning parameters for the
file that it is creating. These tuning parameters are not written to
the data file, they are only used for so long as the file remains open
after an nc__create.

This function creates a new netCDF dataset, returning a netCDF ID that
can subsequently be used to refer to the netCDF dataset in other
netCDF function calls. The new netCDF dataset opened for write access
and placed in define mode, ready for you to add dimensions, variables,
and attributes.

A creation mode flag specifies whether to overwrite any existing
dataset with the same name and whether access to the dataset is
shared, and whether this file should be in netCDF classic format (the
default), or the new 64-bit offset format.

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc__create(const char *path, int cmode, size_t initialsz,
               size_t *chunksizehintp, int *ncidp);
@end example

@table @code
@item path
The file name of the new netCDF dataset.
 
@item cmode
The creation mode flag. The following flags are available:
NC_NOCLOBBER, NC_SHARE, and NC_64BIT_OFFSET.

Setting NC_NOCLOBBER means you do not want to clobber (overwrite) an
existing dataset; an error (NC_EEXIST) is returned if the specified
dataset already exists.

The NC_SHARE flag is appropriate when one process may be writing the
dataset and one or more other processes reading the dataset
concurrently; it means that dataset accesses are not buffered and
caching is limited. Since the buffering scheme is optimized for
sequential access, programs that do not access data sequentially may
see some performance improvement by setting the NC_SHARE flag.

Setting NC_64BIT_OFFSET causes netCDF to create a 64-bit offset format
file, instead of a netCDF classic format file. The 64-bit offset
format imposes far fewer restrictions on very large (i.e. over 2 GB)
data files. @xref{Large File Support,,, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

A zero value (defined for convenience as NC_CLOBBER) specifies the
default behavior: overwrite any existing dataset with the same file
name and buffer and cache accesses for efficiency. The dataset will be
in netCDF classic format. @xref{NetCDF Classic Format Limitations,,,
netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

@item initialsz
This parameter sets the initial size of the file at creation time.

@item chunksizehintp
The argument referenced by chunksizehintp controls a space versus time
tradeoff, memory allocated in the netcdf library versus number of system
calls.

Because of internal requirements, the value may not be set to exactly
the value requested. The actual value chosen is returned by reference.

Using the value NC_SIZEHINT_DEFAULT causes the library to choose a
default. How the system chooses the default depends on the system. On
many systems, the "preferred I/O block size" is available from the
stat() system call, struct stat member st_blksize. If this is
available it is used. Lacking that, twice the system pagesize is used.

Lacking a call to discover the system pagesize, we just set default
chunksize to 8192.

The chunksize is a property of a given open netcdf descriptor
ncid, it is not a persistent property of the netcdf dataset.

@item ncidp
Pointer to location where returned netCDF ID is to be stored.
@end table

@heading Errors 
nc_create returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
Passing a dataset name that includes a directory that does not exist.
@item
Specifying a dataset name of a file that exists and also specifying
NC_NOCLOBBER.
@item
Specifying a meaningless value for the creation mode.
@item
Attempting to create a netCDF dataset in a directory where you don't
have permission to create files.
@end itemize

@heading Examples

In this example we create a netCDF dataset named foo.nc; we want the
dataset to be created in the current directory only if a dataset with
that name does not already exist. We also specify that chunksize and
initial size for the file.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
int intialsz = 2048;
int *chunksize;
   ... 
*chunksize = 1024;
status = nc__create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, initialsz, chunksize, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_open, nc__open, nc__create, Datasets
@section Open a NetCDF Dataset for Access: nc_open 
@findex nc_open
@cindex nc_open, example
@vindex NC_NOWRITE
@vindex NC_WRITE
@vindex NC_SHARE, in nc_open

The function nc_open opens an existing netCDF dataset for access. 

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc_open (const char *path, int omode, int *ncidp);
@end example

@table @code

@item path
File name for netCDF dataset to be opened.
 
@item omode
A zero value (or NC_NOWRITE) specifies the default behavior: open the
dataset with read-only access, buffering and caching accesses for
efficiency

Otherwise, the creation mode is NC_WRITE, NC_SHARE, or
NC_WRITE|NC_SHARE. Setting the NC_WRITE flag opens the dataset with
read-write access. ("Writing" means any kind of change to the dataset,
including appending or changing data, adding or renaming dimensions,
variables, and attributes, or deleting attributes.) The NC_SHARE flag
is appropriate when one process may be writing the dataset and one or
more other processes reading the dataset concurrently; it means that
dataset accesses are not buffered and caching is limited. Since the
buffering scheme is optimized for sequential access, programs that do
not access data sequentially may see some performance improvement by
setting the NC_SHARE flag.
 
@item ncidp
Pointer to location where returned netCDF ID is to be stored.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_open returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF dataset does not exist. 
@item
A meaningless mode was specified. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 
Here is an example using nc_open to open an existing netCDF dataset
named foo.nc for read-only, non-shared access:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", 0, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc__open, nc_redef, nc_open, Datasets
@section Open a NetCDF Dataset for Access with Performance Tuning: nc__open 
@findex nc__open
@cindex nc__open, example
@vindex NC_NOWRITE
@vindex NC_WRITE
@vindex NC_SHARE, in nc__open

A function opens a netCDF dataset for access with an additional
performance tuning parameter.

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc__open(const char *path, int mode, size_t *chunksizehintp, int *ncidp);
@end example

@table @code

@item path
File name for netCDF dataset to be opened.
 
@item omode
A zero value (or NC_NOWRITE) specifies the default behavior: open the
dataset with read-only access, buffering and caching accesses for
efficiency

Otherwise, the creation mode is NC_WRITE, NC_SHARE, or
NC_WRITE|NC_SHARE. Setting the NC_WRITE flag opens the dataset with
read-write access. ("Writing" means any kind of change to the dataset,
including appending or changing data, adding or renaming dimensions,
variables, and attributes, or deleting attributes.) The NC_SHARE flag
is appropriate when one process may be writing the dataset and one or
more other processes reading the dataset concurrently; it means that
dataset accesses are not buffered and caching is limited. Since the
buffering scheme is optimized for sequential access, programs that do
not access data sequentially may see some performance improvement by
setting the NC_SHARE flag.
 
@item chunksizehintp
The argument referenced by chunksizehintp controls a space versus time
tradeoff, memory allocated in the netcdf library versus number of system
calls.

Because of internal requirements, the value may not be set to exactly
the value requested. The actual value chosen is returned by reference.

Using the value NC_SIZEHINT_DEFAULT causes the library to choose a
default. How the system chooses the default depends on the system. On
many systems, the "preferred I/O block size" is available from the
stat() system call, struct stat member st_blksize. If this is
available it is used. Lacking that, twice the system pagesize is used.

Lacking a call to discover the system pagesize, we just set default
chunksize to 8192.

The chunksize is a property of a given open netcdf descriptor
ncid, it is not a persistent property of the netcdf dataset.

@item ncidp
Pointer to location where returned netCDF ID is to be stored.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc__open returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF dataset does not exist. 
@item
A meaningless mode was specified. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 
Here is an example using nc__open to open an existing netCDF dataset
named foo.nc for read-only, non-shared access:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
int *chunksize;
   ... 
*chunksize = 1024;
status = nc_open("foo.nc", 0, chunksize, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_redef, nc_enddef, nc__open, Datasets
@section Put Open NetCDF Dataset into Define Mode: nc_redef 
@findex nc_redef
@cindex nc_redef, example
@cindex adding dimensions using nc_redef
@cindex adding variables using nc_redef
@cindex adding attributes using nc_redef

The function nc_redef puts an open netCDF dataset into define mode, so
dimensions, variables, and attributes can be added or renamed and
attributes can be deleted.

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc_redef(int ncid);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
netCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
@end table

@heading Errors 
nc_redef returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is already in define mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF dataset was opened for read-only. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 
Here is an example using nc_redef to open an existing netCDF dataset
named foo.nc and put it into define mode:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);  /* open dataset */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_redef(ncid);                      /* put in define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_enddef, nc__enddef, nc_redef, Datasets
@section Leave Define Mode: nc_enddef 
@findex nc_enddef
@cindex nc_enddef, example

The function nc_enddef takes an open netCDF dataset out of define
mode. The changes made to the netCDF dataset while it was in define
mode are checked and committed to disk if no problems
occurred. Non-record variables may be initialized to a "fill value" as
well. @xref{nc_set_fill}. The netCDF dataset is then placed in data
mode, so variable data can be read or written.

This call may involve copying data under some circumstances. For a
more extensive discussion see @ref{File Structure and Performance,,,
netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc_enddef(int ncid);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_enddef returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is not in define mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset.

@item
The size of one or more variables exceed the size constraints for
whichever variant of the file format is in use).
@xref{Large File Support,,, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_enddef to finish the definitions of a new
netCDF dataset named foo.nc and put it into data mode:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...       /* create dimensions, variables, attributes */

status = nc_enddef(ncid);  /*leave define mode*/
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc__enddef, nc_close, nc_enddef, Datasets
@section Leave Define Mode with Performance Tuning: nc__enddef 
@findex nc__enddef
@cindex nc__enddef, example

The function nc__enddef takes an open netCDF dataset out of define
mode. The changes made to the netCDF dataset while it was in define
mode are checked and committed to disk if no problems
occurred. Non-record variables may be initialized to a "fill value" as
well. @xref{nc_set_fill}. The netCDF dataset is then placed in data
mode, so variable data can be read or written.

This call may involve copying data under some circumstances. For a
more extensive discussion see @ref{File Structure and Performance,,,
netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

Caution: this function exposes internals of the netcdf version 1 file
format. Users should use nc_enddef in most circumstances. This
function may not be available on future netcdf implementations.

The current netcdf file format has three sections, the "header"
section, the data section for fixed size variables, and the data
section for variables which have an unlimited dimension (record
variables).

The header begins at the beginning of the file. The index (offset) of
the beginning of the other two sections is contained in the
header. Typically, there is no space between the sections. This causes
copying overhead to accrue if one wishes to change the size of the
sections, as may happen when changing names of things, text attribute
values, adding attributes or adding variables. Also, for buffered i/o,
there may be advantages to aligning sections in certain ways.

The minfree parameters allow one to control costs of future calls to
nc_redef, nc_enddef by requesting that minfree bytes be available at
the end of the section.

The align parameters allow one to set the alignment of the beginning
of the corresponding sections. The beginning of the section is rounded
up to an index which is a multiple of the align parameter. The flag
value ALIGN_CHUNK tells the library to use the chunksize (see above)
as the align parameter.

The file format requires mod 4 alignment, so the align parameters
are silently rounded up to multiples of 4. The usual call,

@example
nc_enddef(ncid);
@end example

is equivalent to

@example
nc_enddef(ncid, 0, 4, 0, 4);
@end example

The file format does not contain a "record size" value, this is
calculated from the sizes of the record variables. This unfortunate
fact prevents us from providing minfree and alignment control of the
"records" in a netcdf file. If you add a variable which has an
unlimited dimension, the third section will always be copied with the
new variable added.

@heading Usage 

@example
int nc__enddef(int ncid, size_t h_minfree, size_t v_align,
               size_t v_minfree, size_t r_align);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.

@item h_minfree
Sets the pad at the end of the "header" section.

@item v_align
Controls the alignment of the beginning of the data section for fixed
size variables.

@item v_minfree
Sets the pad at the end of the data section for fixed size variables.

@item r_align
Controls the alignment of the beginning of the data section for
variables which have an unlimited dimension (record variables).

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc__enddef returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is not in define mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset.

@item
The size of one or more variables exceed the size constraints for
whichever variant of the file format is in use).
@xref{Large File Support,,, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_enddef to finish the definitions of a new
netCDF dataset named foo.nc and put it into data mode:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...       /* create dimensions, variables, attributes */

status = nc_enddef(ncid);  /*leave define mode*/
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_close, nc_inq Family, nc__enddef, Datasets
@section Close an Open NetCDF Dataset: nc_close 
@findex nc_close
@cindex nc_close, example

The function nc_close closes an open netCDF dataset. If the dataset is
in define mode, nc_enddef will be called before closing. (In this
case, if nc_enddef returns an error, nc_abort will automatically be
called to restore the dataset to the consistent state before define
mode was last entered.) After an open netCDF dataset is closed, its
netCDF ID may be reassigned to the next netCDF dataset that is opened
or created.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_close(int ncid);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_close returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
Define mode was entered and the automatic call made to nc_enddef
failed.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_close to finish the definitions of a new
netCDF dataset named foo.nc and release its netCDF ID:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...       /* create dimensions, variables, attributes */

status = nc_close(ncid);       /* close netCDF dataset */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_inq Family, nc_sync, nc_close, Datasets
@section Inquire about an Open NetCDF Dataset: nc_inq Family
@findex nc_inq Family
@findex nc_inq_ndims
@findex nc_inq_nvars
@findex nc_inq_natts
@findex nc_inq_unlimdim
@findex nc_inq_format
@cindex attributes, number of
@cindex variables, number of
@cindex dimensions, number of
@cindex format version
@cindex version, format
@cindex nc_inq Family, example

Members of the nc_inq family of functions return information about an
open netCDF dataset, given its netCDF ID. Dataset inquire functions
may be called from either define mode or data mode. The first
function, nc_inq, returns values for the number of dimensions, the
number of variables, the number of global attributes, and the
dimension ID of the dimension defined with unlimited length, if
any. The other functions in the family each return just one of these
items of information.

For C, these functions include nc_inq, nc_inq_ndims, nc_inq_nvars,
nc_inq_natts, and nc_inq_unlimdim.  An additional function,
nc_inq_format, returns the (rarely needed) format version.

No I/O is performed when these functions are called, since the
required information is available in memory for each open netCDF
dataset.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_inq          (int ncid, int *ndimsp, int *nvarsp, int *ngattsp,
                     int *unlimdimidp);
int nc_inq_ndims    (int ncid, int *ndimsp);
int nc_inq_nvars    (int ncid, int *nvarsp);
int nc_inq_natts    (int ncid, int *ngattsp);
int nc_inq_unlimdim (int ncid, int *unlimdimidp);
int nc_inq_format   (int ncid, int *formatp);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item ndimsp
Pointer to location for returned number of dimensions defined for this
netCDF dataset.
 
@item nvarsp
Pointer to location for returned number of variables defined for this
netCDF dataset.
 
@item ngattsp
Pointer to location for returned number of global attributes defined
for this netCDF dataset.
 
@item unlimdimidp
Pointer to location for returned ID of the unlimited dimension, if
there is one for this netCDF dataset. If no unlimited length dimension
has been defined, -1 is returned.

@item formatp
Pointer to location for returned format version, one of 
NC_FORMAT_CLASSIC, NC_FORMAT_64BIT, NC_FORMAT_NETCDF4,
NC_FORMAT_NETCDF4_CLASSIC.
@end table

@heading Errors 

All members of the nc_inq family return the value NC_NOERR if no
errors occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an
error. Possible causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq to find out about a netCDF dataset
named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status, ncid, ndims, nvars, ngatts, unlimdimid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq(ncid, &ndims, &nvars, &ngatts, &unlimdimid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_sync, nc_abort, nc_inq Family, Datasets
@section Synchronize an Open NetCDF Dataset to Disk: nc_sync 
@findex nc_sync
@cindex nc_sync, example

The function nc_sync offers a way to synchronize the disk copy of a
netCDF dataset with in-memory buffers. There are two reasons you might
want to synchronize after writes:
@itemize

@item
To minimize data loss in case of abnormal termination, or 

@item
To make data available to other processes for reading immediately
after it is written. But note that a process that already had the
dataset open for reading would not see the number of records increase
when the writing process calls nc_sync; to accomplish this, the
reading process must call nc_sync.
@end itemize

This function is backward-compatible with previous versions of the
netCDF library. The intent was to allow sharing of a netCDF dataset
among multiple readers and one writer, by having the writer call
nc_sync after writing and the readers call nc_sync before each
read. For a writer, this flushes buffers to disk. For a reader, it
makes sure that the next read will be from disk rather than from
previously cached buffers, so that the reader will see changes made by
the writing process (e.g., the number of records written) without
having to close and reopen the dataset. If you are only accessing a
small amount of data, it can be expensive in computer resources to
always synchronize to disk after every write, since you are giving up
the benefits of buffering.

An easier way to accomplish sharing (and what is now recommended) is
to have the writer and readers open the dataset with the NC_SHARE
flag, and then it will not be necessary to call nc_sync at
all. However, the nc_sync function still provides finer granularity
than the NC_SHARE flag, if only a few netCDF accesses need to be
synchronized among processes.

It is important to note that changes to the ancillary data, such as
attribute values, are not propagated automatically by use of the
NC_SHARE flag. Use of the nc_sync function is still required for this
purpose.

Sharing datasets when the writer enters define mode to change the data
schema requires extra care. In previous releases, after the writer
left define mode, the readers were left looking at an old copy of the
dataset, since the changes were made to a new copy. The only way
readers could see the changes was by closing and reopening the
dataset. Now the changes are made in place, but readers have no
knowledge that their internal tables are now inconsistent with the new
dataset schema. If netCDF datasets are shared across redefinition,
some mechanism external to the netCDF library must be provided that
prevents access by readers during redefinition and causes the readers
to call nc_sync before any subsequent access.

When calling nc_sync, the netCDF dataset must be in data mode. A
netCDF dataset in define mode is synchronized to disk only when
nc_enddef is called. A process that is reading a netCDF dataset that
another process is writing may call nc_sync to get updated with the
changes made to the data by the writing process (e.g., the number of
records written), without having to close and reopen the dataset.

Data is automatically synchronized to disk when a netCDF dataset is
closed, or whenever you leave define mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_sync(int ncid);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_sync returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
The netCDF dataset is in define mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_sync to synchronize the disk writes of a
netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status;
int ncid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);  /* open for writing */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...           /* write data or change attributes */

status = nc_sync(ncid);      /* synchronize to disk */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_abort, nc_set_fill, nc_sync, Datasets
@section Back Out of Recent Definitions: nc_abort 
@findex nc_abort
@cindex nc_abort, example
@cindex backing out of definitions
@cindex canceling definitions

You no longer need to call this function, since it is called
automatically by nc_close in case the dataset is in define mode and
something goes wrong with committing the changes. The function
nc_abort just closes the netCDF dataset, if not in define mode. If the
dataset is being created and is still in define mode, the dataset is
deleted. If define mode was entered by a call to nc_redef, the netCDF
dataset is restored to its state before definition mode was entered
and the dataset is closed.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_abort(int ncid);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_abort returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors occurred. Otherwise,
the returned status indicates an error. Possible causes of errors
include:
@itemize

@item
When called from define mode while creating a netCDF dataset, deletion
of the dataset failed.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_abort to back out of redefinitions of a
dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int ncid, status, latid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);/* open for writing */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_redef(ncid);                    /* enter define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "lat", 18L, &latid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) @{
   handle_error(status);
   status = nc_abort(ncid);                 /* define failed, abort */
   if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@}
@end example

@node nc_set_fill, nc_set_default_format, nc_abort, Datasets
@section Set Fill Mode for Writes: nc_set_fill 
@findex nc_set_fill
@cindex nc_set_fill, example
@cindex write fill mode, setting

This function is intended for advanced usage, to optimize writes under
some circumstances described below. The function nc_set_fill sets the
fill mode for a netCDF dataset open for writing and returns the
current fill mode in a return parameter. The fill mode can be
specified as either NC_FILL or NC_NOFILL. The default behavior
corresponding to NC_FILL is that data is pre-filled with fill values,
that is fill values are written when you create non-record variables
or when you write a value beyond data that has not yet been
written. This makes it possible to detect attempts to read data before
it was written. For more information on the use of fill values
see @ref{Fill Values}. For information about how to define your own fill
values see @ref{Attribute Conventions,,, netcdf, NetCDF
Users' Guide}.

The behavior corresponding to NC_NOFILL overrides the default behavior
of prefilling data with fill values. This can be used to enhance
performance, because it avoids the duplicate writes that occur when
the netCDF library writes fill values that are later overwritten with
data.

A value indicating which mode the netCDF dataset was already in is
returned. You can use this value to temporarily change the fill mode
of an open netCDF dataset and then restore it to the previous mode.

After you turn on NC_NOFILL mode for an open netCDF dataset, you must
be certain to write valid data in all the positions that will later be
read. Note that nofill mode is only a transient property of a netCDF
dataset open for writing: if you close and reopen the dataset, it will
revert to the default behavior. You can also revert to the default
behavior by calling nc_set_fill again to explicitly set the fill mode
to NC_FILL.

There are three situations where it is advantageous to set nofill
mode:
@enumerate
@item
Creating and initializing a netCDF dataset. In this case, you should
set nofill mode before calling nc_enddef and then write completely all
non-record variables and the initial records of all the record
variables you want to initialize.
@item
Extending an existing record-oriented netCDF dataset. Set nofill mode
after opening the dataset for writing, then append the additional
records to the dataset completely, leaving no intervening unwritten
records.
@item
Adding new variables that you are going to initialize to an existing
netCDF dataset. Set nofill mode before calling nc_enddef then write
all the new variables completely.
@end enumerate

If the netCDF dataset has an unlimited dimension and the last record
was written while in nofill mode, then the dataset may be shorter than
if nofill mode was not set, but this will be completely transparent if
you access the data only through the netCDF interfaces.

The use of this feature may not be available (or even needed) in
future releases. Programmers are cautioned against heavy reliance upon
this feature.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_set_fill (int ncid, int fillmode, int *old_modep);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item fillmode
Desired fill mode for the dataset, either NC_NOFILL or NC_FILL.
 
@item old_modep
Pointer to location for returned current fill mode of the dataset
before this call, either NC_NOFILL or NC_FILL.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_set_fill returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID refers to a dataset open for read-only access. 

@item
The fill mode argument is neither NC_NOFILL nor NC_FILL.. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_set_fill to set nofill mode for subsequent
writes of a netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int ncid, status, old_fill_mode;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);  /* open for writing */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...           /* write data with default prefilling behavior */

status = nc_set_fill(ncid, NC_NOFILL, &old_fill_mode); /* set nofill */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...           /* write data with no prefilling */
@end example

@node nc_set_default_format,  , nc_set_fill, Datasets
@section Set Default Creation Format: nc_set_default_format
@findex nc_set_default_format
@cindex nc_set_default_format, example
@cindex create flag, setting default

This function is intended for advanced users. 

Starting in version 3.6, netCDF introduced a new data format, the
first change in the underlying binary data format since the netCDF
interface was released. The new format, 64-bit offset format, was
introduced to greatly relax the limitations on creating very large
files.

Users are warned that creating files in the 64-bit offset format makes
them unreadable by the netCDF library prior to version 3.6.0. For
reasons of compatibility, users should continue to create files in
netCDF classic format.

Users who do want to use 64-bit offset format files can create them
directory from nc_create, using the proper cmode flag.
(@pxref{nc_create}).

The function nc_set_default_format allows the user to change the
format of the netCDF file to be created by future calls to nc_create
(or nc__create) without changing the cmode flag.

This allows the user to convert a program to use 64-bit offset
formation without changing all calls the nc_create. @xref{Large File
Support,,, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

Once the default format is set, all future created files will be in
the desired format.

Two constants are provided in the netcdf.h file to be used with this
function, NC_FORMAT_64BIT and NC_FORMAT_CLASSIC.

If a non-NULL pointer is provided, it is assumed to point to an int,
where the existing default format will be written.

Using nc_create with a cmode including NC_64BIT_OFFSET overrides the
default format, and creates a 64-bit offset file.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_set_default_format(int format, int *old_formatp);
@end example

@table @code

@item format
Either NC_FORMAT_CLASSIC (the default setting) or NC_FORMAT_64BIT.

@item old_formatp
Either NULL (in which case it will be ignored), or a pointer to an int
where the existing default format (i.e. before being changed to the
new format) will be written. This allows you to get the existing
default format while setting a new default format.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_set_default_format returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
Invalid format. The only valid formats are NC_FORMAT_CLASSIC and
NC_FORMAT_64BIT. Trying to set the default format to something else
will result in an invalid argument error. (NC_EINVAL)

@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_set_default_format to create the same file
in both formats with the same nc_create call:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int ncid, status, old_fill_mode;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);  /* open for writing */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...           /* write data with default prefilling behavior */

status = nc_set_fill(ncid, NC_NOFILL, &old_fill_mode); /* set nofill */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

   ...           /* write data with no prefilling */
@end example

@node Dimensions, Variables, Datasets, Top
@chapter Dimensions

@menu
* Dimensions Introduction::     Rules for Dimensions
* nc_def_dim::                  Create a Dimension
* nc_inq_dimid::                Get a Dimension ID from Its Name
* nc_inq_dim Family::           Inquire about a Dimension
* nc_rename_dim::               Rename a Dimension
@end menu

@node Dimensions Introduction, nc_def_dim, Dimensions, Dimensions
@section Dimensions Introduction

Dimensions for a netCDF dataset are defined when it is created, while
the netCDF dataset is in define mode. Additional dimensions may be
added later by reentering define mode. A netCDF dimension has a name
and a length. At most one dimension in a netCDF dataset can have the
unlimited length, which means variables using this dimension can grow
along this dimension.

There is a suggested limit (1024) to the number of dimensions that can
be defined in a single netCDF dataset. The limit is the value of the
predefined macro NC_MAX_DIMS. The purpose of the limit is to make
writing generic applications simpler. They need only provide an array
of NC_MAX_DIMS dimensions to handle any netCDF dataset. The
implementation of the netCDF library does not enforce this advisory
maximum, so it is possible to use more dimensions, if necessary, but
netCDF utilities that assume the advisory maximums may not be able to
handle the resulting netCDF datasets.

Ordinarily, the name and length of a dimension are fixed when the
dimension is first defined. The name may be changed later, but the
length of a dimension (other than the unlimited dimension) cannot be
changed without copying all the data to a new netCDF dataset with a
redefined dimension length.

Dimension lengths in the C interface are type size_t rather than type
int to make it possible to access all the data in a netCDF dataset on
a platform that only supports a 16-bit int data type, for example
MSDOS. If dimension lengths were type int instead, it would not be
possible to access data from variables with a dimension length greater
than a 16-bit int can accommodate.

A netCDF dimension in an open netCDF dataset is referred to by a small
integer called a dimension ID. In the C interface, dimension IDs are
0, 1, 2, ..., in the order in which the dimensions were defined.

Operations supported on dimensions are:
@itemize

@item
Create a dimension, given its name and length. 

@item
Get a dimension ID from its name. 

@item
Get a dimension's name and length from its ID. 

@item
Rename a dimension. 
@end itemize

@node nc_def_dim, nc_inq_dimid, Dimensions Introduction, Dimensions
@section Create a Dimension: nc_def_dim 
@findex nc_def_dim
@cindex nc_def_dim, example

The function nc_def_dim adds a new dimension to an open netCDF dataset
in define mode. It returns (as an argument) a dimension ID, given the
netCDF ID, the dimension name, and the dimension length. At most one
unlimited length dimension, called the record dimension, may be
defined for each netCDF dataset.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_def_dim (int ncid, const char *name, size_t len, int *dimidp);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item name
Dimension name. Must begin with an alphabetic character, followed by
zero or more alphanumeric characters including the underscore
('_'). Case is significant.
 
@item len
Length of dimension; that is, number of values for this dimension as
an index to variables that use it. This should be either a positive
integer (of type size_t) or the predefined constant NC_UNLIMITED.
 
@item dimidp
Pointer to location for returned dimension ID.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_def_dim returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The netCDF dataset is not in definition mode. 

@item
The specified dimension name is the name of another existing
dimension.

@item
The specified length is not greater than zero. 

@item
The specified length is unlimited, but there is already an unlimited
length dimension defined for this netCDF dataset.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset.

@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_def_dim to create a dimension named lat of
length 18 and a unlimited dimension named rec in a new netCDF dataset
named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status, ncid, latid, recid;
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "lat", 18L, &latid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "rec", NC_UNLIMITED, &recid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_inq_dimid, nc_inq_dim Family, nc_def_dim, Dimensions
@section Get a Dimension ID from Its Name: nc_inq_dimid 
@findex nc_inq_dimid
@cindex nc_inq_dimid, example

The function nc_inq_dimid returns (as an argument) the ID of a netCDF
dimension, given the name of the dimension. If ndims is the number of
dimensions defined for a netCDF dataset, each dimension has an ID
between 0 and ndims-1.

@heading Usage 
int nc_inq_dimid (int ncid, const char *name, int *dimidp);

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item name
Dimension name, a character string beginning with a letter and
followed by any sequence of letters, digits, or underscore ('_')
characters. Case is significant in dimension names.
 
@item dimidp
Pointer to location for the returned dimension ID.

@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_inq_dimid returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

The name that was specified is not the name of a dimension in the
netCDF dataset.  The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open
netCDF dataset.

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq_dimid to determine the dimension ID of
a dimension named lat, assumed to have been defined previously in an
existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status, ncid, latid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);  /* open for reading */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_dimid(ncid, "lat", &latid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_inq_dim Family, nc_rename_dim, nc_inq_dimid, Dimensions
@section Inquire about a Dimension: nc_inq_dim Family
@findex nc_inq_dim Family
@cindex nc_inq_dim Family, example

This family of functions returns information about a netCDF
dimension. Information about a dimension includes its name and its
length. The length for the unlimited dimension, if any, is the number
of records written so far.

The functions in this family include nc_inq_dim, nc_inq_dimname, and
nc_inq_dimlen. The function nc_inq_dim returns all the information
about a dimension; the other functions each return just one item of
information.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_inq_dim     (int ncid, int dimid, char* name, size_t* lengthp);
int nc_inq_dimname (int ncid, int dimid, char *name);
int nc_inq_dimlen  (int ncid, int dimid, size_t *lengthp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create. 
 
@item dimid
Dimension ID, from a previous call to nc_inq_dimid or nc_def_dim.
 
@item name
Returned dimension name. The caller must allocate space for the
returned name. The maximum possible length, in characters, of a
dimension name is given by the predefined constant NC_MAX_NAME. (This
doesn't include the null terminator, so declare your array to be size
NC_MAX_NAME+1). The returned character array will be null-terminated.
 
@item lengthp
Pointer to location for returned length of dimension. For the
unlimited dimension, this is the number of records written so far.

@end table

@heading Errors 

These functions return the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The dimension ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq_dim to determine the length of a
dimension named lat, and the name and current maximum length of the
unlimited dimension for an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status, ncid, latid, recid;
size_t latlength, recs;
char recname[NC_MAX_NAME+1];
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);  /* open for reading */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_unlimdim(ncid, &recid); /* get ID of unlimited dimension */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_dimid(ncid, "lat", &latid);  /* get ID for lat dimension */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_dimlen(ncid, latid, &latlength); /* get lat length */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
/* get unlimited dimension name and current length */
status = nc_inq_dim(ncid, recid, recname, &recs);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_rename_dim,  , nc_inq_dim Family, Dimensions
@section Rename a Dimension: nc_rename_dim 
@findex nc_rename_dim
@cindex nc_rename_dim, example

The function nc_rename_dim renames an existing dimension in a netCDF
dataset open for writing. If the new name is longer than the old name,
the netCDF dataset must be in define mode. You cannot rename a
dimension to have the same name as another dimension.

@heading Usage 
int nc_rename_dim(int ncid, int dimid, const char* name);

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item dimid
Dimension ID, from a previous call to nc_inq_dimid or nc_def_dim.
 
@item name
New dimension name.

@end table

@heading Errors 
nc_rename_dim returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The new name is the name of another dimension. 

@item
The dimension ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@item
The new name is longer than the old name and the netCDF dataset is not in define mode. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 
Here is an example using nc_rename_dim to rename the dimension lat to
latitude in an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int status, ncid, latid;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);  /* open for writing */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_redef(ncid);  /* put in define mode to rename dimension */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_dimid(ncid, "lat", &latid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_rename_dim(ncid, latid, "latitude");
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_enddef(ncid); /* leave define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node Variables, Attributes, Dimensions, Top
@chapter Variables

@menu
* Variable Introduction::       What are Variables?
* Variable Types::              Floating point, integer, and all that
* nc_def_var::                  Create a Variable
* nc_inq_varid::                Get a Variable ID from Its Name
* nc_inq_var::                  Get Information about a Variable from Its ID
* nc_put_var1_ type::           Write a Single Data Value
* nc_put_var_ type::            Write an Entire Variable
* nc_put_vara_ type::           Write an Array of Values
* nc_put_vars_ type::           Write a Subsampled Array of Values
* nc_put_varm_ type::           Write a Mapped Array of Values
* nc_get_var1_ type::           Read a Single Data Value
* nc_get_var_ type::            Read an Entire Variable
* nc_get_vara_ type::           Read an Array of Values
* nc_get_vars_ type::           Read a Subsampled Array of Values
* nc_get_varm_ type::           Read a Mapped Array of Values
* Strings::                     Reading and Writing Character String Values
* Fill Values::                 What's Written Where there's No Data?
* nc_rename_var::               Rename a Variable
@end menu

@node Variable Introduction, Variable Types, Variables, Variables
@section Introduction
@cindex appending data to variable
@cindex variables, rules

Variables for a netCDF dataset are defined when the dataset is
created, while the netCDF dataset is in define mode. Other variables
may be added later by reentering define mode. A netCDF variable has a
name, a type, and a shape, which are specified when it is defined. A
variable may also have values, which are established later in data
mode.

Ordinarily, the name, type, and shape are fixed when the variable is
first defined. The name may be changed, but the type and shape of a
variable cannot be changed. However, a variable defined in terms of
the unlimited dimension can grow without bound in that dimension.

A netCDF variable in an open netCDF dataset is referred to by a small
integer called a variable ID.

Variable IDs reflect the order in which variables were defined within
a netCDF dataset. Variable IDs are 0, 1, 2,..., in the order in which
the variables were defined. A function is available for getting the
variable ID from the variable name and vice-versa.

Attributes (@pxref{Attributes}) may be associated with a variable to
specify such properties as units.

Operations supported on variables are:
@itemize

@item
Create a variable, given its name, data type, and shape. 

@item
Get a variable ID from its name. 

@item
Get a variable's name, data type, shape, and number of attributes from
its ID.

@item
Put a data value into a variable, given variable ID, indices, and
value.

@item
Put an array of values into a variable, given variable ID, corner
indices, edge lengths, and a block of values.

@item
Put a subsampled or mapped array-section of values into a variable,
given variable ID, corner indices, edge lengths, stride vector, index
mapping vector, and a block of values.

@item
Get a data value from a variable, given variable ID and indices. 

@item
Get an array of values from a variable, given variable ID, corner
indices, and edge lengths.

@item
Get a subsampled or mapped array-section of values from a variable,
given variable ID, corner indices, edge lengths, stride vector, and
index mapping vector.

@item
Rename a variable. 
@end itemize

@node Variable Types, nc_def_var, Variable Introduction, Variables
@section Language Types Corresponding to netCDF external data types
@cindex bit lengths of data types

The following table gives the netCDF external data types and the
corresponding type constants for defining variables in the C
interface:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .60 .15
@item Type @tab C #define @tab Bits

@item byte
@tab NC_BYTE 
@tab 8
 
@item char
@tab NC_CHAR 
@tab 8
 
@item short
@tab NC_SHORT 
@tab 16
 
@item int
@tab NC_INT 
@tab 32
 
@item float
@tab NC_FLOAT 
@tab 32
 
@item double
@tab NC_DOUBLE 
@tab 64
@end multitable
 
The first column gives the netCDF external data type, which is the
same as the CDL data type. The next column gives the corresponding C
preprocessor macro for use in netCDF functions (the preprocessor
macros are defined in the netCDF C header-file netcdf.h). The last
column gives the number of bits used in the external representation of
values of the corresponding type.

Note that there are no netCDF types corresponding to 64-bit integers
or to characters wider than 8 bits in the current version of the
netCDF library.

@node nc_def_var, nc_inq_varid, Variable Types, Variables
@section Create a Variable: @code{nc_def_var} 
@findex nc_def_var
@cindex nc_def_var, example
@cindex creating variables
@cindex variables, creating

The function nc_def_var adds a new variable to an open netCDF dataset
in define mode. It returns (as an argument) a variable ID, given the
netCDF ID, the variable name, the variable type, the number of
dimensions, and a list of the dimension IDs.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_def_var (int ncid, const char *name, nc_type xtype,
                int ndims, const int dimids[], int *varidp);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item name
Variable name. Must begin with an alphabetic character, followed by
zero or more alphanumeric characters including the underscore
('_'). Case is significant.
 
@item xtype
One of the set of predefined netCDF external data types. The type of
this parameter, nc_type, is defined in the netCDF header file. The
valid netCDF external data types are NC_BYTE, NC_CHAR, NC_SHORT,
NC_INT, NC_FLOAT, and NC_DOUBLE.
 
@item ndims
Number of dimensions for the variable. For example, 2 specifies a
matrix, 1 specifies a vector, and 0 means the variable is a scalar
with no dimensions. Must not be negative or greater than the
predefined constant NC_MAX_VAR_DIMS.
 
@item dimids
Vector of ndims dimension IDs corresponding to the variable
dimensions. If the ID of the unlimited dimension is included, it must
be first. This argument is ignored if ndims is 0.
 
@item varidp
Pointer to location for the returned variable ID.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_def_var returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The netCDF dataset is not in define mode. 

@item
The specified variable name is the name of another existing variable. 

@item
The specified type is not a valid netCDF type. 

@item
The specified number of dimensions is negative or more than the
constant NC_MAX_VAR_DIMS, the maximum number of dimensions permitted
for a netCDF variable.

@item
One or more of the dimension IDs in the list of dimensions is not a
valid dimension ID for the netCDF dataset.

@item
The number of variables would exceed the constant NC_MAX_VARS, the
maximum number of variables permitted in a netCDF dataset.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_def_var to create a variable named rh of
type double with three dimensions, time, lat, and lon in a new netCDF
dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;                       /* error status */
int  ncid;                         /* netCDF ID */
int  lat_dim, lon_dim, time_dim;   /* dimension IDs */
int  rh_id;                        /* variable ID */
int  rh_dimids[3];                 /* variable shape */
   ... 
status = nc_create("foo.nc", NC_NOCLOBBER, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
                                   /* define dimensions */
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "lat", 5L, &lat_dim);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "lon", 10L, &lon_dim);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "time", NC_UNLIMITED, &time_dim);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
                                   /* define variable */
rh_dimids[0] = time_dim;
rh_dimids[1] = lat_dim;
rh_dimids[2] = lon_dim;
status = nc_def_var (ncid, "rh", NC_DOUBLE, 3, rh_dimids, &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_inq_varid, nc_inq_var, nc_def_var, Variables
@section Get a Variable ID from Its Name: nc_inq_varid 
@findex nc_inq_varid
@cindex nc_inq_varid, example
@cindex variables, inquiring about
@cindex inquiring about variables

The function nc_inq_varid returns the ID of a netCDF variable, given
its name.

@heading Usage
@example
int nc_inq_varid (int ncid, const char *name, int *varidp);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item name
Variable name for which ID is desired.
 
@item varidp
Pointer to location for returned variable ID.
@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_inq_varid returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The specified variable name is not a valid name for a variable in the
specified netCDF dataset.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq_varid to find out the ID of a variable
named rh in an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status, ncid, rh_id;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_inq_var, nc_put_var1_ type, nc_inq_varid, Variables
@section Get Information about a Variable from Its ID: nc_inq_var
family
@findex nc_inq_var
@cindex nc_inq_var, example
@cindex variables, getting name

A family of functions that returns information about a netCDF
variable, given its ID. Information about a variable includes its
name, type, number of dimensions, a list of dimension IDs describing
the shape of the variable, and the number of variable attributes that
have been assigned to the variable.

The function nc_inq_var returns all the information about a netCDF
variable, given its ID. The other functions each return just one item
of information about a variable.

These other functions include nc_inq_varname, nc_inq_vartype,
nc_inq_varndims, nc_inq_vardimid, and nc_inq_varnatts.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_inq_var      (int ncid, int varid, char *name, nc_type *xtypep,
                     int *ndimsp, int dimids[], int *nattsp);
int nc_inq_varname  (int ncid, int varid, char *name);
int nc_inq_vartype  (int ncid, int varid, nc_type *xtypep);
int nc_inq_varndims (int ncid, int varid, int *ndimsp);
int nc_inq_vardimid (int ncid, int varid, int dimids[]);
int nc_inq_varnatts (int ncid, int varid, int *nattsp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item name
Returned variable name. The caller must allocate space for the
returned name. The maximum possible length, in characters, of a
variable name is given by the predefined constant NC_MAX_NAME. (This
doesn't include the null terminator, so declare your array to be size
NC_MAX_NAME+1). The returned character array will be null-terminated.
 
@item xtypep
Pointer to location for returned variable type, one of the set of
predefined netCDF external data types. The type of this parameter,
nc_type, is defined in the netCDF header file. The valid netCDF
external data types are NC_BYTE, NC_CHAR, NC_SHORT, NC_INT, NC_FLOAT,
and NC_DOUBLE.
 
@item ndimsp
Pointer to location for returned number of dimensions the variable
was defined as using. For example, 2 indicates a matrix, 1 indicates a
vector, and 0 means the variable is a scalar with no dimensions.
 
@item dimids
Returned vector of *ndimsp dimension IDs corresponding to the
variable dimensions. The caller must allocate enough space for a
vector of at least *ndimsp integers to be returned. The maximum
possible number of dimensions for a variable is given by the
predefined constant NC_MAX_VAR_DIMS.
 
@item nattsp
Pointer to location for returned number of variable attributes
assigned to this variable.
@end table

These functions return the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq_var to find out about a variable named
rh in an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status                        /* error status */
int  ncid;                         /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                        /* variable ID */
nc_type rh_type;                   /* variable type */
int rh_ndims;                      /* number of dims */
int  rh_dims[NC_MAX_VAR_DIMS];     /* variable shape */
int rh_natts                       /* number of attributes */
   ... 
status = nc_open ("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
/* we don't need name, since we already know it */
status = nc_inq_var (ncid, rh_id, 0, &rh_type, &rh_ndims, rh_dims,
                     &rh_natts);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_put_var1_ type, nc_put_var_ type, nc_inq_var, Variables
@section Write a Single Data Value: nc_put_var1_ @var{type}
@findex nc_put_var1_ type
@cindex nc_put_var1_ type, example
@cindex writing single value

The functions nc_put_var1_ @var{type} put a single data value of the
specified type into a variable of an open netCDF dataset that is in
data mode. Inputs are the netCDF ID, the variable ID, an index that
specifies which value to add or alter, and the data value. The value
is converted to the external data type of the variable, if necessary.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_put_var1_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const char *tp);
int nc_put_var1_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const unsigned char *up);
int nc_put_var1_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const signed char *cp);
int nc_put_var1_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const short *sp);
int nc_put_var1_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const int *ip);
int nc_put_var1_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const long *lp);
int nc_put_var1_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const float *fp); 
int nc_put_var1_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       const double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item index[]
The index of the data value to be written. The indices are relative
to 0, so for example, the first data value of a two-dimensional
variable would have index (0,0). The elements of index must correspond
to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable uses the
unlimited dimension, the first index would correspond to the unlimited
dimension.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the data value to be written. If the type of data values
differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion will
occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_put_var1_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset.

@item
The specified indices were out of range for the rank of the specified
variable. For example, a negative index or an index that is larger
than the corresponding dimension length will cause an error.

@item
The specified value is out of the range of values representable by the
external data type of the variable.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_put_var1_double to set the (1,2,3) element
of the variable named rh to 0.5 in an existing netCDF dataset named
foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume that we know that rh
is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, so we want to set the value of
rh that corresponds to the second time value, the third lat value, and
the fourth lon value:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;                          /* error status */
int  ncid;                            /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                           /* variable ID */
static size_t rh_index[] = @{1, 2, 3@}; /* where to put value */
static double rh_val = 0.5;           /* value to put */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_put_var1_double(ncid, rh_id, rh_index, &rh_val);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_put_var_ type, nc_put_vara_ type, nc_put_var1_ type, Variables
@section Write an Entire Variable: nc_put_var_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_put_var_ type
@cindex nc_put_var_ type, example
@cindex writing entire variable
@cindex entire variable, writing
@cindex variable, writing entire

The nc_put_var_ @var{type} family of functions write all the values of a
variable into a netCDF variable of an open netCDF dataset. This is the
simplest interface to use for writing a value in a scalar variable or
whenever all the values of a multidimensional variable can all be
written at once. The values to be written are associated with the
netCDF variable by assuming that the last dimension of the netCDF
variable varies fastest in the C interface. The values are converted
to the external data type of the variable, if necessary.

Take care when using the simplest forms of this interface with record
variables when you don't specify how many records are to be
written. If you try to write all the values of a record variable into
a netCDF file that has no record data yet (hence has 0 records),
nothing will be written. Similarly, if you try to write all of a
record variable but there are more records in the file than you
assume, more data may be written to the file than you supply, which
may result in a segmentation violation.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_put_var_text  (int ncid, int varid, const char *tp);
int nc_put_var_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const unsigned char *up);
int nc_put_var_schar (int ncid, int varid, const signed char *cp);
int nc_put_var_short (int ncid, int varid, const short *sp);
int nc_put_var_int   (int ncid, int varid, const int *ip);
int nc_put_var_long  (int ncid, int varid, const long *lp);
int nc_put_var_float (int ncid, int varid, const float *fp);
int nc_put_var_double(int ncid, int varid, const double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to a block of data values to be written. The order in which
the data will be written to the netCDF variable is with the last
dimension of the specified variable varying fastest. If the type of
data values differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

Members of the nc_put_var_ @var{type} family return the value NC_NOERR if no
errors occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an
error. Possible causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
One or more of the specified values are out of the range of values
representable by the external data type of the variable.

@item
One or more of the specified values are out of the range of values
representable by the external data type of the variable.

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is in define mode rather than data mode.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_put_var_double to add or change all the
values of the variable named rh to 0.5 in an existing netCDF dataset
named foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume that we know
that rh is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, and that there are
three time values, five lat values, and ten lon values.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define TIMES 3
#define LATS  5
#define LONS  10
int  status;                       /* error status */
int  ncid;                         /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                        /* variable ID */
double rh_vals[TIMES*LATS*LONS];   /* array to hold values */
int i;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
for (i = 0; i < TIMES*LATS*LONS; i++)
    rh_vals[i] = 0.5;
/* write values into netCDF variable */
status = nc_put_var_double(ncid, rh_id, rh_vals);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_put_vara_ type, nc_put_vars_ type, nc_put_var_ type, Variables
@section Write an Array of Values: nc_put_vara_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_put_vara_ type
@cindex nc_put_vara_ type, example
@cindex writing array section
@cindex array section, writing

The function nc_put_vara_ @var{type} writes values into a netCDF variable of
an open netCDF dataset. The part of the netCDF variable to write is
specified by giving a corner and a vector of edge lengths that refer
to an array section of the netCDF variable. The values to be written
are associated with the netCDF variable by assuming that the last
dimension of the netCDF variable varies fastest in the C
interface. The netCDF dataset must be in data mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_put_vara_ type   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const type *valuesp);
int nc_put_vara_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const char *tp);
int nc_put_vara_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const unsigned char *up);
int nc_put_vara_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const signed char *cp);
int nc_put_vara_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const short *sp);
int nc_put_vara_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const int *ip);
int nc_put_vara_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const long *lp);
int nc_put_vara_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const float *fp);
int nc_put_vara_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item start
A vector of size_t integers specifying the index in the variable
where the first of the data values will be written. The indices are
relative to 0, so for example, the first data value of a variable
would have index (0, 0, ... , 0). The size of start must be the same
as the number of dimensions of the specified variable. The elements of
start must correspond to the variable's dimensions in order. Hence, if
the variable is a record variable, the first index would correspond to
the starting record number for writing the data values.
 
@item count
A vector of size_t integers specifying the edge lengths along each
dimension of the block of data values to be written. To write a single
value, for example, specify count as (1, 1, ... , 1). The length of
count is the number of dimensions of the specified variable. The
elements of count correspond to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if
the variable is a record variable, the first element of count
corresponds to a count of the number of records to write.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to a block of data values to be written. The order in which
the data will be written to the netCDF variable is with the last
dimension of the specified variable varying fastest. If the type of
data values differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_put_vara_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified corner indices were out of range for the rank of the
specified variable. For example, a negative index, or an index that is
larger than the corresponding dimension length will cause an error.

@item
The specified edge lengths added to the specified corner would have
referenced data out of range for the rank of the specified
variable. For example, an edge length that is larger than the
corresponding dimension length minus the corner index will cause an
error.

@item
One or more of the specified values are out of the range of values
representable by the external data type of the variable.

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_put_vara_double to add or change all the
values of the variable named rh to 0.5 in an existing netCDF dataset
named foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume that we know
that rh is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, and that there are
three time values, five lat values, and ten lon values.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define TIMES 3
#define LATS  5
#define LONS  10
int  status;                       /* error status */
int  ncid;                         /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                        /* variable ID */
static size_t start[] = @{0, 0, 0@}; /* start at first value */
static size_t count[] = @{TIMES, LATS, LONS@};
double rh_vals[TIMES*LATS*LONS];   /* array to hold values */
int i;
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
for (i = 0; i < TIMES*LATS*LONS; i++)
    rh_vals[i] = 0.5;
/* write values into netCDF variable */
status = nc_put_vara_double(ncid, rh_id, start, count, rh_vals);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_put_vars_ type, nc_put_varm_ type, nc_put_vara_ type, Variables
@section Write a Subsampled Array of Values: nc_put_vars_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_put_vars_ type
@cindex nc_put_vars_ type, example
@cindex writing subsampled array
@cindex subsampled array, writing

Each member of the family of functions nc_put_vars_ @var{type} writes a
subsampled (strided) array section of values into a netCDF variable of
an open netCDF dataset. The subsampled array section is specified by
giving a corner, a vector of counts, and a stride vector. The netCDF
dataset must be in data mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_put_vars_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const char *tp);
int nc_put_vars_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const unsigned char *up);
int nc_put_vars_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const signed char *cp);
int nc_put_vars_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const short *sp);
int nc_put_vars_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const int *ip);
int nc_put_vars_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const long *lp);
int nc_put_vars_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const float *fp);
int nc_put_vars_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item start
A vector of size_t integers specifying the index in the variable
where the first of the data values will be written. The indices are
relative to 0, so for example, the first data value of a variable
would have index (0, 0, ... , 0). The elements of start correspond, in
order, to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a
record variable, the first index corresponds to the starting record
number for writing the data values.
 
@item count
A vector of size_t integers specifying the number of indices selected
along each dimension. To write a single value, for example, specify
count as (1, 1, ... , 1). The elements of count correspond, in order,
to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a record
variable, the first element of count corresponds to a count of the
number of records to write.
 
@item stride
A vector of ptrdiff_t integers that specifies the sampling interval
along each dimension of the netCDF variable. The elements of the
stride vector correspond, in order, to the netCDF variable's
dimensions (stride[0] gives the sampling interval along the most
slowly varying dimension of the netCDF variable). Sampling intervals
are specified in type-independent units of elements (a value of 1
selects consecutive elements of the netCDF variable along the
corresponding dimension, a value of 2 selects every other element,
etc.). A NULL stride argument is treated as (1, 1, ... , 1).
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to a block of data values to be written. The order in which
the data will be written to the netCDF variable is with the last
dimension of the specified variable varying fastest. If the type of
data values differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_put_vars_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified start, count and stride generate an index which is out
of range.

@item
One or more of the specified values are out of the range of values
representable by the external data type of the variable.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example of using nc_put_vars_float to write -- from an
internal array -- every other point of a netCDF variable named rh
which is described by the C declaration float rh[4][6] (note the size
of the dimensions):

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define NDIM 2                /* rank of netCDF variable */
int ncid;                     /* netCDF ID */
int status;                   /* error status */
int rhid;                     /* variable ID */
static size_t start[NDIM]     /* netCDF variable start point: */
                 = @{0, 0@};    /* first element */
static size_t count[NDIM]     /* size of internal array: entire */
                   = @{2, 3@};  /* (subsampled) netCDF variable */
static ptrdiff_t stride[NDIM] /* variable subsampling intervals: */
                 = @{2, 2@};    /* access every other netCDF element */
float rh[2][3];               /* note subsampled sizes for */
                              /* netCDF variable dimensions */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid(ncid, "rh", &rhid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_put_vars_float(ncid, rhid, start, count, stride, rh);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_put_varm_ type, nc_get_var1_ type, nc_put_vars_ type, Variables
@section Write a Mapped Array of Values: nc_put_varm_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_put_varm_ type
@cindex nc_put_varm_ type, example
@cindex array, writing mapped
@cindex writing mapped array
@cindex mapped array, writing

The nc_put_varm_ @var{type} family of functions writes a mapped array
section of values into a netCDF variable of an open netCDF
dataset. The mapped array section is specified by giving a corner, a
vector of counts, a stride vector, and an index mapping vector. The
index mapping vector is a vector of integers that specifies the
mapping between the dimensions of a netCDF variable and the in-memory
structure of the internal data array. No assumptions are made about
the ordering or length of the dimensions of the data array. The netCDF
dataset must be in data mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_put_varm_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const char *tp);
int nc_put_varm_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const unsigned char *up);
int nc_put_varm_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const signed char *cp);
int nc_put_varm_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const short *sp);
int nc_put_varm_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const int *ip);
int nc_put_varm_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const long *lp);
int nc_put_varm_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const float *fp);
int nc_put_varm_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], const double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item start
A vector of size_t integers specifying the index in the variable
where the first of the data values will be written. The indices are
relative to 0, so for example, the first data value of a variable
would have index (0, 0, ... , 0). The elements of start correspond, in
order, to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a
record variable, the first index corresponds to the starting record
number for writing the data values.
 
@item count
A vector of size_t integers specifying the number of indices selected
along each dimension. To write a single value, for example, specify
count as (1, 1, ... , 1). The elements of count correspond, in order,
to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a record
variable, the first element of count corresponds to a count of the
number of records to write.
 
@item stride
A vector of ptrdiff_t integers that specifies the sampling interval
along each dimension of the netCDF variable. The elements of the
stride vector correspond, in order, to the netCDF variable's
dimensions (stride[0] gives the sampling interval along the most
slowly varying dimension of the netCDF variable). Sampling intervals
are specified in type-independent units of elements (a value of 1
selects consecutive elements of the netCDF variable along the
corresponding dimension, a value of 2 selects every other element,
etc.). A NULL stride argument is treated as (1, 1, ... , 1).
 
@item imap
A vector of ptrdiff_t integers that specifies the mapping between the
dimensions of a netCDF variable and the in-memory structure of the
internal data array. The elements of the index mapping vector
correspond, in order, to the netCDF variable's dimensions (imap[0]
gives the distance between elements of the internal array
corresponding to the most slowly varying dimension of the netCDF
variable). Distances between elements are specified in
type-independent units of elements (the distance between internal
elements that occupy adjacent memory locations is 1 and not the
element's byte-length as in netCDF 2). A NULL argument means the
memory-resident values have the same structure as the associated
netCDF variable.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the location used for computing where the data values will
be found; the data should be of the type appropriate for the function
called. If the type of data values differs from the netCDF variable
type, type conversion will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The
NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_put_varm_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified start, count, and stride generate an index which is out
of range. Note that no error checking is possible on the imap vector.

@item
One or more of the specified values are out of the range of values
representable by the external data type of the variable.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@end itemize

@heading Example 

The following imap vector maps in the trivial way a 4x3x2 netCDF
variable and an internal array of the same shape:

@example
float a[4][3][2];       /* same shape as netCDF variable */
int   imap[3] = @{6, 2, 1@};
                        /* netCDF dimension       inter-element distance */
                        /* ----------------       ---------------------- */
                        /* most rapidly varying       1                  */
                        /* intermediate               2 (=imap[2]*2)     */
                        /* most slowly varying        6 (=imap[1]*3)     */
@end example

Using the imap vector above with nc_put_varm_float obtains the same
result as simply using nc_put_var_float.

Here is an example of using nc_put_varm_float to write -- from a
transposed, internal array -- a netCDF variable named rh which is
described by the C declaration float rh[6][4] (note the size and order
of the dimensions):

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define NDIM 2               /* rank of netCDF variable */
int ncid;                    /* netCDF ID */
int status;                  /* error status */
int rhid;                    /* variable ID */
static size_t start[NDIM]    /* netCDF variable start point: */
                 = @{0, 0@};   /* first element */
static size_t count[NDIM]    /* size of internal array: entire netCDF */
                 = @{6, 4@};   /* variable; order corresponds to netCDF */
                             /* variable -- not internal array */
static ptrdiff_t stride[NDIM]/* variable subsampling intervals: */
                 = @{1, 1@};   /* sample every netCDF element */
static ptrdiff_t imap[NDIM]  /* internal array inter-element distances; */
                 = @{1, 6@};   /* would be @{4, 1@} if not transposing */
float rh[4][6];              /* note transposition of netCDF variable */
                             /* dimensions */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid(ncid, "rh", &rhid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_put_varm_float(ncid, rhid, start, count, stride, imap, rh);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

Here is another example of using nc_put_varm_float to write -- from a
transposed, internal array -- a subsample of the same netCDF variable,
by writing every other point of the netCDF variable:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define NDIM 2                /* rank of netCDF variable */
int ncid;                     /* netCDF ID */
int status;                   /* error status */
int rhid;                     /* variable ID */
static size_t start[NDIM]     /* netCDF variable start point: */
                 = @{0, 0@};    /* first element */
static size_t count[NDIM]     /* size of internal array: entire */
                   = @{3, 2@};  /* (subsampled) netCDF variable; order of */
                              /* dimensions corresponds to netCDF */
                              /* variable -- not internal array */
static ptrdiff_t stride[NDIM] /* variable subsampling intervals: */
                 = @{2, 2@};    /* sample every other netCDF element */
static ptrdiff_t imap[NDIM]   /* internal array inter-element distances; */
                 = @{1, 3@};    /* would be @{2, 1@} if not transposing */
float rh[2][3];               /* note transposition of (subsampled) */
                              /* netCDF variable dimensions */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid(ncid, "rh", &rhid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_put_varm_float(ncid, rhid, start, count, stride, imap, rh);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_get_var1_ type, nc_get_var_ type, nc_put_varm_ type, Variables
@section Read a Single Data Value: nc_get_var1_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_get_var1_ type
@cindex nc_get_var1_ type, example
@cindex reading single value
@cindex single value, reading

The functions nc_get_var1_ @var{type} get a single data value from a
variable of an open netCDF dataset that is in data mode. Inputs are
the netCDF ID, the variable ID, a multidimensional index that
specifies which value to get, and the address of a location into which
the data value will be read. The value is converted from the external
data type of the variable, if necessary.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_get_var1_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       char *tp);
int nc_get_var1_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       unsigned char *up);
int nc_get_var1_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       signed char *cp);
int nc_get_var1_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       short *sp);
int nc_get_var1_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       int *ip);
int nc_get_var1_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       long *lp);
int nc_get_var1_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       float *fp); 
int nc_get_var1_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t index[],
                       double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item index[]
The index of the data value to be read. The indices are relative to
0, so for example, the first data value of a two-dimensional variable
would have index (0,0). The elements of index must correspond to the
variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a record variable,
the first index is the record number.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the location into which the data value is read. If the type
of data value differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_get_var1_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified indices were out of range for the rank of the specified
variable. For example, a negative index or an index that is larger
than the corresponding dimension length will cause an error.

@item
The value is out of the range of values representable by the desired
data type.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_get_var1_double to get the (1,2,3) element
of the variable named rh in an existing netCDF dataset named
foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume that we know that rh
is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, so we want to get the value of
rh that corresponds to the second time value, the third lat value, and
the fourth lon value:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;                           /* error status */
int ncid;                              /* netCDF ID */
int rh_id;                             /* variable ID */
static size_t rh_index[] = @{1, 2, 3@};  /* where to get value from */
double rh_val;                         /* where to put it */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_get_var1_double(ncid, rh_id, rh_index, &rh_val);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_get_var_ type, nc_get_vara_ type, nc_get_var1_ type, Variables
@section Read an Entire Variable nc_get_var_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_get_var_ type
@cindex nc_get_var_ type, example
@cindex reading entire variable
@cindex entire variable, reading

The members of the nc_get_var_ @var{type} family of functions read all the
values from a netCDF variable of an open netCDF dataset. This is the
simplest interface to use for reading the value of a scalar variable
or when all the values of a multidimensional variable can be read at
once. The values are read into consecutive locations with the last
dimension varying fastest. The netCDF dataset must be in data mode.

Take care when using the simplest forms of this interface with record
variables when you don't specify how many records are to be read. If
you try to read all the values of a record variable into an array but
there are more records in the file than you assume, more data will be
read than you expect, which may cause a segmentation violation.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_get_var_text  (int ncid, int varid, char *tp);
int nc_get_var_uchar (int ncid, int varid, unsigned char *up);
int nc_get_var_schar (int ncid, int varid, signed char *cp);
int nc_get_var_short (int ncid, int varid, short *sp);
int nc_get_var_int   (int ncid, int varid, int *ip);
int nc_get_var_long  (int ncid, int varid, long *lp);
int nc_get_var_float (int ncid, int varid, float *fp);
int nc_get_var_double(int ncid, int varid, double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the location into which the data value is read. If the type
of data value differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_get_var_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
One or more of the values are out of the range of values representable
by the desired type.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_get_var_double to read all the values of
the variable named rh from an existing netCDF dataset named
foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume that we know that rh
is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, and that there are three time
values, five lat values, and ten lon values.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define TIMES 3
#define LATS 5
#define LONS 10
int  status;                       /* error status */
int ncid;                          /* netCDF ID */
int rh_id;                         /* variable ID */
double rh_vals[TIMES*LATS*LONS];   /* array to hold values */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* read values from netCDF variable */
status = nc_get_var_double(ncid, rh_id, rh_vals);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_get_vara_ type, nc_get_vars_ type, nc_get_var_ type, Variables
@section Read an Array of Values: nc_get_vara_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_get_vara_ type
@cindex nc_get_vara_ type, example
@cindex array section, reading mapped
@cindex array section, writing mapped

The members of the nc_get_vara_ @var{type} family of functions read an array
of values from a netCDF variable of an open netCDF dataset. The array
is specified by giving a corner and a vector of edge lengths. The
values are read into consecutive locations with the last dimension
varying fastest. The netCDF dataset must be in data mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_get_vara_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] char *tp);
int nc_get_vara_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] unsigned char *up);
int nc_get_vara_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] signed char *cp);
int nc_get_vara_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] short *sp);
int nc_get_vara_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] int *ip);
int nc_get_vara_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] long *lp);
int nc_get_vara_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] float *fp);
int nc_get_vara_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[] double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item start
A vector of size_t integers specifying the index in the variable
where the first of the data values will be read. The indices are
relative to 0, so for example, the first data value of a variable
would have index (0, 0, ... , 0). The length of start must be the same
as the number of dimensions of the specified variable. The elements of
start correspond, in order, to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if
the variable is a record variable, the first index would correspond to
the starting record number for reading the data values.
 
@item count
A vector of size_t integers specifying the edge lengths along each
dimension of the block of data values to be read. To read a single
value, for example, specify count as (1, 1, ... , 1). The length of
count is the number of dimensions of the specified variable. The
elements of count correspond, in order, to the variable's
dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a record variable, the first
element of count corresponds to a count of the number of records to
read.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the location into which the data value is read. If the type
of data value differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_get_vara_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified corner indices were out of range for the rank of the
specified variable. For example, a negative index or an index that is
larger than the corresponding dimension length will cause an error.

@item
The specified edge lengths added to the specified corner would have
referenced data out of range for the rank of the specified
variable. For example, an edge length that is larger than the
corresponding dimension length minus the corner index will cause an
error.

@item
One or more of the values are out of the range of values representable
by the desired type.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_get_vara_double to read all the values of
the variable named rh from an existing netCDF dataset named
foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume that we know that rh
is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, and that there are three time
values, five lat values, and ten lon values.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define TIMES 3
 #define LATS 5
#define LONS 10
int  status;                       /* error status */
int ncid;                          /* netCDF ID */
int rh_id;                         /* variable ID */
static size_t start[] = @{0, 0, 0@}; /* start at first value */
static size_t count[] = @{TIMES, LATS, LONS@};
double rh_vals[TIMES*LATS*LONS];   /* array to hold values */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* read values from netCDF variable */
status = nc_get_vara_double(ncid, rh_id, start, count, rh_vals);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_get_vars_ type, nc_get_varm_ type, nc_get_vara_ type, Variables
@section Read a Subsampled Array of Values: nc_get_vars_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_get_vars_ type
@cindex nc_get_vars_ type, example
@cindex array section, writing subsampled
@cindex array section, reading subsampled

The nc_get_vars_ @var{type} family of functions read a subsampled (strided)
array section of values from a netCDF variable of an open netCDF
dataset. The subsampled array section is specified by giving a corner,
a vector of edge lengths, and a stride vector. The values are read
with the last dimension of the netCDF variable varying fastest. The
netCDF dataset must be in data mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_get_vars_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       char *tp);
int nc_get_vars_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       unsigned char *up);
int nc_get_vars_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       signed char *cp);
int nc_get_vars_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       short *sp);
int nc_get_vars_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       int *ip);
int nc_get_vars_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       long *lp);
int nc_get_vars_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       float *fp);
int nc_get_vars_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       double *dp)
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item start
A vector of size_t integers specifying the index in the variable
where the first of the data values will be read. The indices are
relative to 0, so for example, the first data value of a variable
would have index (0, 0, ... , 0). The elements of start correspond, in
order, to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a
record variable, the first index corresponds to the starting record
number for reading the data values.
 
@item count
A vector of size_t integers specifying the number of indices selected
along each dimension. To read a single value, for example, specify
count as (1, 1, ... , 1). The elements of count correspond, in order,
to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a record
variable, the first element of count corresponds to a count of the
number of records to read.
 
@item stride
A vector of ptrdiff_t integers specifying, for each dimension, the
interval between selected indices. The elements of the stride vector
correspond, in order, to the variable's dimensions. A value of 1
accesses adjacent values of the netCDF variable in the corresponding
dimension; a value of 2 accesses every other value of the netCDF
variable in the corresponding dimension; and so on. A NULL stride
argument is treated as (1, 1, ... , 1).
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the location into which the data value is read. If the type
of data value differs from the netCDF variable type, type conversion
will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_get_vars_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified start, count and stride generate an index which is out
of range.

@item
One or more of the values are out of the range of values representable
by the desired type.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example that uses nc_get_vars_double to read every other
value in each dimension of the variable named rh from an existing
netCDF dataset named foo.nc. For simplicity in this example, we assume
that we know that rh is dimensioned with time, lat, and lon, and that
there are three time values, five lat values, and ten lon values.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define TIMES 3
#define LATS  5
#define LONS 10
int  status;                          /* error status */
int ncid;                             /* netCDF ID */
int rh_id;                            /* variable ID */
static size_t start[] = @{0, 0, 0@};    /* start at first value */
static size_t count[] = @{TIMES, LATS, LONS@};
static ptrdiff_t stride[] = @{2, 2, 2@};/* every other value */
double data[TIMES][LATS][LONS];       /* array to hold values */
 ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
 ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
 ... 
/* read subsampled values from netCDF variable into array */
status = nc_get_vars_double(ncid, rh_id, start, count, stride, 
                            &data[0][0][0]);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
 ... 
@end example

@node nc_get_varm_ type, Strings, nc_get_vars_ type, Variables
@section Read a Mapped Array of Values: nc_get_varm_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_get_varm_ type
@cindex nc_get_varm_ type, example
@cindex writing mapped array section
@cindex mapped array section, writing

The nc_get_varm_ @var{type} family of functions reads a mapped array section
of values from a netCDF variable of an open netCDF dataset. The mapped
array section is specified by giving a corner, a vector of edge
lengths, a stride vector, and an index mapping vector. The index
mapping vector is a vector of integers that specifies the mapping
between the dimensions of a netCDF variable and the in-memory
structure of the internal data array. No assumptions are made about
the ordering or length of the dimensions of the data array. The netCDF
dataset must be in data mode.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_get_varm_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], char *tp);
int nc_get_varm_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], unsigned char *up);
int nc_get_varm_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], signed char *cp);
int nc_get_varm_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], short *sp);
int nc_get_varm_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], int *ip);
int nc_get_varm_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], long *lp);
int nc_get_varm_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], float *fp);
int nc_get_varm_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t start[],
                       const size_t count[], const ptrdiff_t stride[],
                       const ptrdiff_t imap[], double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID.
 
@item start
A vector of size_t integers specifying the index in the variable
where the first of the data values will be read. The indices are
relative to 0, so for example, the first data value of a variable
would have index (0, 0, ... , 0). The elements of start correspond, in
order, to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a
record variable, the first index corresponds to the starting record
number for reading the data values.
 
@item count
A vector of size_t integers specifying the number of indices selected
along each dimension. To read a single value, for example, specify
count as (1, 1, ... , 1). The elements of count correspond, in order,
to the variable's dimensions. Hence, if the variable is a record
variable, the first element of count corresponds to a count of the
number of records to read.
 
@item stride
A vector of ptrdiff_t integers specifying, for each dimension, the
interval between selected indices. The elements of the stride vector
correspond, in order, to the variable's dimensions. A value of 1
accesses adjacent values of the netCDF variable in the corresponding
dimension; a value of 2 accesses every other value of the netCDF
variable in the corresponding dimension; and so on. A NULL stride
argument is treated as (1, 1, ... , 1).
 
@item imap
A vector of integers that specifies the mapping between the
dimensions of a netCDF variable and the in-memory structure of the
internal data array. imap[0] gives the distance between elements of
the internal array corresponding to the most slowly varying dimension
of the netCDF variable. imap[n-1] (where n is the rank of the netCDF
variable) gives the distance between elements of the internal array
corresponding to the most rapidly varying dimension of the netCDF
variable. Intervening imap elements correspond to other dimensions of
the netCDF variable in the obvious way. Distances between elements are
specified in type-independent units of elements (the distance between
internal elements that occupy adjacent memory locations is 1 and not
the element's byte-length as in netCDF 2).
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to the location used for computing where the data values are
read; the data should be of the type appropriate for the function
called. If the type of data value differs from the netCDF variable
type, type conversion will occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The
NetCDF Users Guide}.

@end table

@heading Errors 

nc_get_varm_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified start, count, and stride generate an index which is out
of range. Note that no error checking is possible on the imap vector.

@item
One or more of the values are out of the range of values representable
by the desired type.

@item
The specified netCDF is in define mode rather than data mode. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@end itemize

@heading Example 

The following imap vector maps in the trivial way a 4x3x2 netCDF
variable and an internal array of the same shape:

@example
float a[4][3][2];       /* same shape as netCDF variable */
size_t imap[3] = @{6, 2, 1@};
                        /* netCDF dimension       inter-element distance */
                        /* ----------------       ---------------------- */
                        /* most rapidly varying       1                  */
                        /* intermediate               2 (=imap[2]*2)     */
                        /* most slowly varying        6 (=imap[1]*3)     */
@end example

Using the imap vector above with nc_get_varm_float obtains the same
result as simply using nc_get_var_float.

Here is an example of using nc_get_varm_float to transpose a netCDF
variable named rh which is described by the C declaration float
rh[6][4] (note the size and order of the dimensions):

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define NDIM 2                /* rank of netCDF variable */
int ncid;                     /* netCDF ID */
int status;                   /* error status */
int rhid;                     /* variable ID */
static size_t start[NDIM]     /* netCDF variable start point: */
                 = @{0, 0@};    /* first element */
static size_t count[NDIM]     /* size of internal array: entire netCDF */
                 = @{6, 4@};    /* variable; order corresponds to netCDF */
                              /* variable -- not internal array */
static ptrdiff_t stride[NDIM] /* variable subsampling intervals: */
                 = @{1, 1@};    /* sample every netCDF element */
static ptrdiff_t imap[NDIM]   /* internal array inter-element distances; */
                 = @{1, 6@};    /* would be @{4, 1@} if not transposing */
float rh[4][6];               /* note transposition of netCDF variable */
                              /* dimensions */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid(ncid, "rh", &rhid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_get_varm_float(ncid, rhid, start, count, stride, imap, rh);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

Here is another example of using nc_get_varm_float to simultaneously
transpose and subsample the same netCDF variable, by accessing every
other point of the netCDF variable:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
#define NDIM 2               /* rank of netCDF variable */
int ncid;                    /* netCDF ID */
int status;                  /* error status */
int rhid;                    /* variable ID */
static size_t start[NDIM]    /* netCDF variable start point: */
                 = @{0, 0@};   /* first element */
static size_t count[NDIM]    /* size of internal array: entire */
                   = @{3, 2@}; /* (subsampled) netCDF variable; order of */
                             /* dimensions corresponds to netCDF */
                             /* variable -- not internal array */
static ptrdiff_t stride[NDIM]/* variable subsampling intervals: */
                 = @{2, 2@};   /* sample every other netCDF element */
static ptrdiff_t imap[NDIM]  /* internal array inter-element distances; */
                 = @{1, 3@};   /* would be @{2, 1@} if not transposing */
float rh[2][3];              /* note transposition of (subsampled) */
                             /* netCDF variable dimensions */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid(ncid, "rh", &rhid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_get_varm_float(ncid, rhid, start, count, stride, imap, rh);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node Strings, Fill Values, nc_get_varm_ type, Variables
@section Reading and Writing Character String Values
@cindex attributes, character string
@cindex byte, zero
@cindex zero byte
@cindex writing character-string data
@cindex character-string data, writing 

Character strings are not a primitive netCDF external data type, in
part because FORTRAN does not support the abstraction of
variable-length character strings (the FORTRAN LEN function returns
the static length of a character string, not its dynamic length). As a
result, a character string cannot be written or read as a single
object in the netCDF interface. Instead, a character string must be
treated as an array of characters, and array access must be used to
read and write character strings as variable data in netCDF
datasets. Furthermore, variable-length strings are not supported by
the netCDF interface except by convention; for example, you may treat
a zero byte as terminating a character string, but you must explicitly
specify the length of strings to be read from and written to netCDF
variables.

Character strings as attribute values are easier to use, since the
strings are treated as a single unit for access. However, the value of
a character-string attribute is still an array of characters with an
explicit length that must be specified when the attribute is defined.

When you define a variable that will have character-string values, use
a character-position dimension as the most quickly varying dimension
for the variable (the last dimension for the variable in C). The
length of the character-position dimension will be the maximum string
length of any value to be stored in the character-string
variable. Space for maximum-length strings will be allocated in the
disk representation of character-string variables whether you use the
space or not. If two or more variables have the same maximum length,
the same character-position dimension may be used in defining the
variable shapes.

To write a character-string value into a character-string variable,
use either entire variable access or array access. The latter requires
that you specify both a corner and a vector of edge lengths. The
character-position dimension at the corner should be zero for C. If
the length of the string to be written is n, then the vector of edge
lengths will specify n in the character-position dimension, and one
for all the other dimensions:(1, 1, ... , 1, n).

In C, fixed-length strings may be written to a netCDF dataset without
the terminating zero byte, to save space. Variable-length strings
should be written with a terminating zero byte so that the intended
length of the string can be determined when it is later read.

Here is an example that defines a record variable, tx, for character
strings and stores a character-string value into the third record
using nc_put_vara_text. In this example, we assume the string variable
and data are to be added to an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc
that already has an unlimited record dimension time.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  ncid;            /* netCDF ID */
int  chid;            /* dimension ID for char positions */
int  timeid;          /* dimension ID for record dimension */
int  tx_id;           /* variable ID */
#define TDIMS 2       /* rank of tx variable */
int tx_dims[TDIMS];   /* variable shape */
size_t tx_start[TDIMS];
size_t tx_count[TDIMS];
static char tx_val[] =
        "example string"; /* string to be put */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_redef(ncid);       /* enter define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* define character-position dimension for strings of max length 40 */
status = nc_def_dim(ncid, "chid", 40L, &chid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* define a character-string variable */
tx_dims[0] = timeid;
tx_dims[1] = chid;    /* character-position dimension last */
status = nc_def_var (ncid, "tx", NC_CHAR, TDIMS, tx_dims, &tx_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_enddef(ncid);       /* leave define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* write tx_val into tx netCDF variable in record 3 */
tx_start[0] = 3;      /* record number to write */
tx_start[1] = 0;      /* start at beginning of variable */
tx_count[0] = 1;      /* only write one record */
tx_count[1] = strlen(tx_val) + 1;  /* number of chars to write */
status = nc_put_vara_text(ncid, tx_id, tx_start, tx_count, tx_val);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node Fill Values, nc_rename_var, Strings, Variables
@section Fill Values
@cindex fill values
@cindex byte vs. char fill values

What happens when you try to read a value that was never written in an
open netCDF dataset? You might expect that this should always be an
error, and that you should get an error message or an error status
returned. You do get an error if you try to read data from a netCDF
dataset that is not open for reading, if the variable ID is invalid
for the specified netCDF dataset, or if the specified indices are not
properly within the range defined by the dimension lengths of the
specified variable. Otherwise, reading a value that was not written
returns a special fill value used to fill in any undefined values when
a netCDF variable is first written.

You may ignore fill values and use the entire range of a netCDF
external data type, but in this case you should make sure you write
all data values before reading them. If you know you will be writing
all the data before reading it, you can specify that no prefilling of
variables with fill values will occur by calling nc_set_fill before
writing. This may provide a significant performance gain for netCDF
writes.

The variable attribute _FillValue may be used to specify the fill
value for a variable. Their are default fill values for each type,
defined in the include file netcdf.h: NC_FILL_CHAR, NC_FILL_BYTE,
NC_FILL_SHORT, NC_FILL_INT, NC_FILL_FLOAT, and NC_FILL_DOUBLE.

The netCDF byte and character types have different default fill
values. The default fill value for characters is the zero byte, a
useful value for detecting the end of variable-length C character
strings. If you need a fill value for a byte variable, it is
recommended that you explicitly define an appropriate _FillValue
attribute, as generic utilities such as ncdump will not assume a
default fill value for byte variables.

Type conversion for fill values is identical to type conversion for
other values: attempting to convert a value from one type to another
type that can't represent the value results in a range error. Such
errors may occur on writing or reading values from a larger type (such
as double) to a smaller type (such as float), if the fill value for
the larger type cannot be represented in the smaller type.

@node nc_rename_var,  , Fill Values, Variables
@section Rename a Variable: nc_rename_var 
@findex nc_rename_var
@cindex nc_rename_var, example
@cindex renaming variable
@cindex variable, renaming

The function nc_rename_var changes the name of a netCDF variable in an
open netCDF dataset. If the new name is longer than the old name, the
netCDF dataset must be in define mode. You cannot rename a variable to
have the name of any existing variable.

@heading Usage 
int nc_rename_var(int ncid, int varid, const char* name);

ncid
 NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
varid
 Variable ID.
 
name
 New name for the specified variable.
 
@heading Errors 

nc_rename_var returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

The new name is in use as the name of another variable. 
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_rename_var to rename the variable rh to
rel_hum in an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;              /* error status */
int  ncid;                /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;               /* variable ID */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_redef(ncid);  /* put in define mode to rename variable */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_rename_var (ncid, rh_id, "rel_hum");
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_enddef(ncid); /* leave define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node Attributes, Summary of C Interface, Variables, Top
@chapter Attributes

@menu
* Attributes Introduction::     What are Attributes?
* nc_put_att_ type::            Write an Attribute
* nc_inq_att Family::           Get Information about an Attribute
* nc_get_att_ type::            Read an Attribute
* nc_copy_att::                 Copy an Attribute
* nc_rename_att::               Rename an Attribute
* nc_del_att::                  Delete an Attribute
@end menu

@node Attributes Introduction, nc_put_att_ type, Attributes, Attributes
@section Introduction
@cindex attributes, introduction
@cindex attributes, operations on

Attributes may be associated with each netCDF variable to specify such
properties as units, special values, maximum and minimum valid values,
scaling factors, and offsets. Attributes for a netCDF dataset are
defined when the dataset is first created, while the netCDF dataset is
in define mode. Additional attributes may be added later by reentering
define mode. A netCDF attribute has a netCDF variable to which it is
assigned, a name, a type, a length, and a sequence of one or more
values. An attribute is designated by its variable ID and name. When
an attribute name is not known, it may be designated by its variable
ID and number in order to determine its name, using the function
nc_inq_attname.

The attributes associated with a variable are typically defined
immediately after the variable is created, while still in define
mode. The data type, length, and value of an attribute may be changed
even when in data mode, as long as the changed attribute requires no
more space than the attribute as originally defined.

It is also possible to have attributes that are not associated with
any variable. These are called global attributes and are identified by
using NC_GLOBAL as a variable pseudo-ID. Global attributes are usually
related to the netCDF dataset as a whole and may be used for purposes
such as providing a title or processing history for a netCDF dataset.

Operations supported on attributes are:
@itemize

@item
Create an attribute, given its variable ID, name, data type, length, and value. 

@item
Get attribute's data type and length from its variable ID and name. 

@item
Get attribute's value from its variable ID and name. 

@item
Copy attribute from one netCDF variable to another. 

@item
Get name of attribute from its number. 

@item
Rename an attribute. 

@item
Delete an attribute. 
@end itemize

@node nc_put_att_ type, nc_inq_att Family, Attributes Introduction, Attributes
@section Create an Attribute: nc_put_att_ @var{type}
@findex nc_put_att_ type
@cindex nc_put_att_ type, example
@cindex attributes, creating
@cindex attributes, writing
@cindex writing attributes

The function nc_put_att_ @var{type} adds or changes a variable attribute or
global attribute of an open netCDF dataset. If this attribute is new,
or if the space required to store the attribute is greater than
before, the netCDF dataset must be in define mode.

@heading Usage 

Although it's possible to create attributes of all types, text and
double attributes are adequate for most purposes.

@example
int nc_put_att_text   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, 
                                      size_t len, const char *tp);
int nc_put_att_uchar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                          nc_type xtype, size_t len, const unsigned char *up);
int nc_put_att_schar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                          nc_type xtype, size_t len, const signed char *cp);
int nc_put_att_short  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const short *sp);
int nc_put_att_int    (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const int *ip);
int nc_put_att_long   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const long *lp);
int nc_put_att_float  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const float *fp);
int nc_put_att_double (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const double *dp);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID of the variable to which the attribute will be assigned or
NC_GLOBAL for a global attribute.
 
@item name
Attribute name. Must begin with an alphabetic character, followed by
zero or more alphanumeric characters including the underscore
('_'). Case is significant. Attribute name conventions are assumed by
some netCDF generic applications, e.g., units as the name for a string
attribute that gives the units for a netCDF variable. For examples of
attribute conventions see @ref{Attribute Conventions,,, netcdf,
@value{n-man}}.
 
@item xtype
One of the set of predefined netCDF external data types. The type of
this parameter, nc_type, is defined in the netCDF header file. The
valid netCDF external data types are NC_BYTE, NC_CHAR, NC_SHORT,
NC_INT, NC_FLOAT, and NC_DOUBLE. Although it's possible to create
attributes of all types, NC_CHAR and NC_DOUBLE attributes are adequate
for most purposes.
 
@item len
Number of values provided for the attribute.
 
@item tp, up, cp, sp, ip, lp, fp, or dp
Pointer to one or more values. If the type of values differs from the
netCDF attribute type specified as xtype, type conversion will
occur. @xref{Type Conversion,,, netcdf, The NetCDF Users Guide}.
@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_put_att_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified netCDF type is invalid. 

@item
The specified length is negative. 

@item
The specified open netCDF dataset is in data mode and the specified
attribute would expand.

@item
The specified open netCDF dataset is in data mode and the specified
attribute does not already exist.

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@item
The number of attributes for this variable exceeds NC_MAX_ATTRS. 

@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_put_att_double to add a variable attribute
named valid_range for a netCDF variable named rh and a global
attribute named title to an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;                            /* error status */
int  ncid;                              /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                             /* variable ID */
static double rh_range[] = @{0.0, 100.0@};/* attribute vals */
static char title[] = "example netCDF dataset";
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_redef(ncid);                /* enter define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_put_att_double (ncid, rh_id, "valid_range", 
                            NC_DOUBLE, 2, rh_range);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_put_att_text (ncid, NC_GLOBAL, "title",
                          strlen(title), title)
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_enddef(ncid);               /* leave define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_inq_att Family, nc_get_att_ type, nc_put_att_ type, Attributes
@section Get Information about an Attribute: nc_inq_att Family
@findex nc_inq_att Family
@cindex nc_inq_att Family, example
@cindex attributes, ID
@cindex attributes, getting information about
@cindex attributes, inquiring about
@cindex attributes, finding length
@cindex length of attributes
@cindex inquiring about attributes

This family of functions returns information about a netCDF
attribute. All but one of these functions require the variable ID and
attribute name; the exception is nc_inq_attname. Information about an
attribute includes its type, length, name, and number. See the
nc_get_att family for getting attribute values.

The function nc_inq_attname gets the name of an attribute, given its
variable ID and number. This function is useful in generic
applications that need to get the names of all the attributes
associated with a variable, since attributes are accessed by name
rather than number in all other attribute functions. The number of an
attribute is more volatile than the name, since it can change when
other attributes of the same variable are deleted. This is why an
attribute number is not called an attribute ID.

The function nc_inq_att returns the attribute's type and length. The
other functions each return just one item of information about an
attribute.


@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_inq_att    (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                   nc_type *xtypep, size_t *lenp);
int nc_inq_atttype(int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                   nc_type *xtypep);
int nc_inq_attlen  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, size_t *lenp);
int nc_inq_attname(int ncid, int varid, int attnum, char *name);
int nc_inq_attid   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, int *attnump); 
@end example

@vtable @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID of the attribute's variable, or NC_GLOBAL for a global
attribute.
 
@item name
Attribute name. For nc_inq_attname, this is a pointer to the location
for the returned attribute name.
 
@item xtypep
Pointer to location for returned attribute type, one of the set of
predefined netCDF external data types. The type of this parameter,
nc_type, is defined in the netCDF header file. The valid netCDF
external data types are NC_BYTE, NC_CHAR, NC_SHORT, NC_INT, NC_FLOAT,
and NC_DOUBLE. If this parameter is given as '0' (a null pointer), no
type will be returned so no variable to hold the type needs to be
declared.
 
@item lenp
Pointer to location for returned number of values currently stored in
the attribute. For attributes of type NC_CHAR, you should not assume
that this includes a trailing zero byte; it doesn't if the attribute
was stored without a trailing zero byte, for example from a FORTRAN
program. Before using the value as a C string, make sure it is
null-terminated. If this parameter is given as '0' (a null pointer),
no length will be returned so no variable to hold this information
needs to be declared.
 
@item attnum
For nc_inq_attname, attribute number. The attributes for each
variable are numbered from 0 (the first attribute) to natts-1, where
natts is the number of attributes for the variable, as returned from a
call to nc_inq_varnatts.
 
@item attnump
For nc_inq_attid, pointer to location for returned attribute number
that specifies which attribute this is for this variable (or which
global attribute). If you already know the attribute name, knowing its
number is not very useful, because accessing information about an
attribute requires its name.

@end vtable

@heading Errors 

Each function returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified attribute does not exist. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@item
For nc_inq_attname, the specified attribute number is negative or more
than the number of attributes defined for the specified variable.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_inq_att to find out the type and length of
a variable attribute named valid_range for a netCDF variable named rh
and a global attribute named title in an existing netCDF dataset named
foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;               /* error status */
int  ncid;                 /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                /* variable ID */
nc_type vr_type, t_type;   /* attribute types */
int  vr_len, t_len;        /* attribute lengths */

   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_att (ncid, rh_id, "valid_range", &vr_type, &vr_len);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_att (ncid, NC_GLOBAL, "title", &t_type, &t_len);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_get_att_ type, nc_copy_att, nc_inq_att Family, Attributes
@section Get Attribute's Values:nc_get_att_ @var{type} 
@findex nc_get_att_ type
@cindex nc_get_att_ type, example
@cindex attributes, reading
@cindex reading attributes

Members of the nc_get_att_ @var{type} family of functions get the value(s)
of a netCDF attribute, given its variable ID and name.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_get_att_text   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, 
                       char *tp);
int nc_get_att_uchar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       unsigned char *up);
int nc_get_att_schar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       signed char *cp);
int nc_get_att_short  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       short *sp);
int nc_get_att_int    (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       int *ip);
int nc_get_att_long   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       long *lp);
int nc_get_att_float  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       float *fp);
int nc_get_att_double (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, 
                       double *dp);
@end example

@table @code

@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
Variable ID of the attribute's variable, or NC_GLOBAL for a global attribute.
 
@item name
Attribute name.
 
@item tp
@itemx up
@itemx cp
@itemx sp
@itemx ip
@itemx lp
@itemx fp
@itemx dp
Pointer to location for returned attribute value(s). All elements of
the vector of attribute values are returned, so you must allocate
enough space to hold them. For attributes of type NC_CHAR, you should
not assume that the returned values include a trailing zero byte; they
won't if the attribute was stored without a trailing zero byte, for
example from a FORTRAN program. Before using the value as a C string,
make sure it is null-terminated. If you don't know how much space to
reserve, call nc_inq_attlen first to find out the length of the
attribute.

@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_get_att_ @var{type} returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF dataset. 

@item
The specified attribute does not exist. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset. 

@item
One or more of the attribute values are out of the range of values
representable by the desired type.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_get_att_double to determine the values of
a variable attribute named valid_range for a netCDF variable named rh
and a global attribute named title in an existing netCDF dataset named
foo.nc. In this example, it is assumed that we don't know how many
values will be returned, but that we do know the types of the
attributes. Hence, to allocate enough space to store them, we must
first inquire about the length of the attributes.

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;               /* error status */
int  ncid;                 /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;                /* variable ID */
int  vr_len, t_len;        /* attribute lengths */
double *vr_val;            /* ptr to attribute values */
char *title;               /* ptr to attribute values */
extern char *malloc();     /* memory allocator */

   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* find out how much space is needed for attribute values */
status = nc_inq_attlen (ncid, rh_id, "valid_range", &vr_len);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_attlen (ncid, NC_GLOBAL, "title", &t_len);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);

/* allocate required space before retrieving values */
vr_val = (double *) malloc(vr_len * sizeof(double));
title = (char *) malloc(t_len + 1);  /* + 1 for trailing null */

/* get attribute values */
status = nc_get_att_double(ncid, rh_id, "valid_range", vr_val);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_get_att_text(ncid, NC_GLOBAL, "title", title);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
title[t_len] = '\0';       /* null terminate */
   ... 
@end example

@node nc_copy_att, nc_rename_att, nc_get_att_ type, Attributes
@section Copy Attribute from One NetCDF to Another: nc_copy_att 
@findex nc_copy_att
@cindex nc_copy_att, example
@cindex attributes, copying
@cindex copying attributes

The function nc_copy_att copies an attribute from one open netCDF
dataset to another. It can also be used to copy an attribute from one
variable to another within the same netCDF.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_copy_att (int ncid_in, int varid_in, const char *name,
                 int ncid_out, int varid_out);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid_in
The netCDF ID of an input netCDF dataset from which the attribute
will be copied, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid_in
ID of the variable in the input netCDF dataset from which the
attribute will be copied, or NC_GLOBAL for a global attribute.
 
@item name
Name of the attribute in the input netCDF dataset to be copied.
 
@item ncid_out
The netCDF ID of the output netCDF dataset to which the attribute
will be copied, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create. It is
permissible for the input and output netCDF IDs to be the same. The
output netCDF dataset should be in define mode if the attribute to be
copied does not already exist for the target variable, or if it would
cause an existing target attribute to grow.
 
@item varid_out
ID of the variable in the output netCDF dataset to which the
attribute will be copied, or NC_GLOBAL to copy to a global attribute.
@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_copy_att returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The input or output variable ID is invalid for the specified netCDF
dataset.

@item
The specified attribute does not exist. 

@item
The output netCDF is not in define mode and the attribute is new for
the output dataset is larger than the existing attribute.

@item
The input or output netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF
dataset.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_copy_att to copy the variable attribute
units from the variable rh in an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc
to the variable avgrh in another existing netCDF dataset named bar.nc,
assuming that the variable avgrh already exists, but does not yet have
a units attribute:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;               /* error status */
int  ncid1, ncid2;         /* netCDF IDs */
int  rh_id, avgrh_id;      /* variable IDs */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, ncid1);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_open("bar.nc", NC_WRITE, ncid2);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid1, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid2, "avgrh", &avgrh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_redef(ncid2);  /* enter define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
/* copy variable attribute from "rh" to "avgrh" */
status = nc_copy_att(ncid1, rh_id, "units", ncid2, avgrh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_enddef(ncid2); /* leave define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_rename_att, nc_del_att, nc_copy_att, Attributes
@section Rename an Attribute: nc_rename_att 
@findex nc_rename_att
@cindex nc_rename_att, example
@cindex attributes, renaming
@cindex renaming attributes

The function nc_rename_att changes the name of an attribute. If the
new name is longer than the original name, the netCDF dataset must be
in define mode. You cannot rename an attribute to have the same name
as another attribute of the same variable.

@heading Usage 
@example
int nc_rename_att (int ncid, int varid, const char* name, 
                   const char* newname);
@end example

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create
 
@item varid
ID of the attribute's variable, or NC_GLOBAL for a global attribute
 
@item name
The current attribute name.
 
@item newname
The new name to be assigned to the specified attribute. If the new
name is longer than the current name, the netCDF dataset must be in
define mode.
@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_rename_att returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:
@itemize

@item
The specified variable ID is not valid. 

@item
The new attribute name is already in use for another attribute of the
specified variable.

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is in data mode and the new name is
longer than the old name.

@item
The specified attribute does not exist. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_rename_att to rename the variable
attribute units to Units for a variable rh in an existing netCDF
dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;      /* error status */
int  ncid;        /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;       /* variable id */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_NOWRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* rename attribute */
status = nc_rename_att(ncid, rh_id, "units", "Units");
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node nc_del_att,  , nc_rename_att, Attributes
@section Delete an Attribute: nc_del_att 
@findex nc_del_att
@cindex nc_del_att, example
@cindex attributes, deleting
@cindex deleting attributes

The function nc_del_att deletes a netCDF attribute from an open netCDF
dataset. The netCDF dataset must be in define mode.

@heading Usage 
int nc_del_att (int ncid, int varid, const char* name);

@table @code
@item ncid
NetCDF ID, from a previous call to nc_open or nc_create.
 
@item varid
ID of the attribute's variable, or NC_GLOBAL for a global attribute.
 
@item name
The name of the attribute to be deleted.
@end table
 
@heading Errors 

nc_del_att returns the value NC_NOERR if no errors
occurred. Otherwise, the returned status indicates an error. Possible
causes of errors include:

@itemize

@item
The specified variable ID is not valid. 

@item
The specified netCDF dataset is in data mode. 

@item
The specified attribute does not exist. 

@item
The specified netCDF ID does not refer to an open netCDF dataset.
@end itemize

@heading Example 

Here is an example using nc_del_att to delete the variable attribute
Units for a variable rh in an existing netCDF dataset named foo.nc:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
   ... 
int  status;      /* error status */
int  ncid;        /* netCDF ID */
int  rh_id;       /* variable ID */
   ... 
status = nc_open("foo.nc", NC_WRITE, &ncid);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
status = nc_inq_varid (ncid, "rh", &rh_id);
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
   ... 
/* delete attribute */
status = nc_redef(ncid);        /* enter define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_del_att(ncid, rh_id, "Units");
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
status = nc_enddef(ncid);       /* leave define mode */
if (status != NC_NOERR) handle_error(status);
@end example

@node Summary of C Interface, NetCDF 2 C Transition Guide, Attributes, Top
@appendix Summary of C Interface
@cindex API, C summary
@cindex C API summary

@example
const char* nc_inq_libvers (void);
const char* nc_strerror    (int ncerr);

int nc_create         (const char *path, int cmode, int *ncidp);
int nc_open           (const char *path, int mode, int *ncidp);
int nc_set_fill       (int ncid, int fillmode, int *old_modep);
int nc_redef          (int ncid);
int nc_enddef         (int ncid);
int nc_sync           (int ncid);
int nc_abort          (int ncid);
int nc_close          (int ncid);
int nc_inq            (int ncid, int *ndimsp, int *nvarsp,
                       int *ngattsp, int *unlimdimidp);
int nc_inq_ndims      (int ncid, int *ndimsp);
int nc_inq_nvars      (int ncid, int *nvarsp);
int nc_inq_natts      (int ncid, int *ngattsp);
int nc_inq_unlimdim   (int ncid, int *unlimdimidp);

int nc_def_dim        (int ncid, const char *name, size_t len,
                       int *idp);
int nc_inq_dimid      (int ncid, const char *name, int *idp);
int nc_inq_dim        (int ncid, int dimid, char *name, size_t *lenp);
int nc_inq_dimname    (int ncid, int dimid, char *name);
int nc_inq_dimlen     (int ncid, int dimid, size_t *lenp);
int nc_rename_dim     (int ncid, int dimid, const char *name);

int nc_def_var        (int ncid, const char *name, nc_type xtype,
                       int ndims, const int *dimidsp, int *varidp);
int nc_inq_var        (int ncid, int varid, char *name, 
                       nc_type *xtypep, int *ndimsp, int *dimidsp,
                       int *nattsp);
int nc_inq_varid      (int ncid, const char *name, int *varidp);
int nc_inq_varname    (int ncid, int varid, char *name);
int nc_inq_vartype    (int ncid, int varid, nc_type *xtypep);
int nc_inq_varndims   (int ncid, int varid, int *ndimsp);
int nc_inq_vardimid   (int ncid, int varid, int *dimidsp);
int nc_inq_varnatts   (int ncid, int varid, int *nattsp);
int nc_rename_var     (int ncid, int varid, const char *name);
int nc_put_var_text   (int ncid, int varid, const char *op);
int nc_get_var_text   (int ncid, int varid,       char *ip);
int nc_put_var_uchar  (int ncid, int varid, const unsigned char *op);
int nc_get_var_uchar  (int ncid, int varid,       unsigned char *ip);
int nc_put_var_schar  (int ncid, int varid, const signed char *op);
int nc_get_var_schar  (int ncid, int varid,       signed char *ip);
int nc_put_var_short  (int ncid, int varid, const short *op);
int nc_get_var_short  (int ncid, int varid,       short *ip);
int nc_put_var_int    (int ncid, int varid, const int *op);
int nc_get_var_int    (int ncid, int varid,       int *ip);
int nc_put_var_long   (int ncid, int varid, const long *op);
int nc_get_var_long   (int ncid, int varid,       long *ip);
int nc_put_var_float  (int ncid, int varid, const float *op); 
int nc_get_var_float  (int ncid, int varid,       float *ip); 
int nc_put_var_double (int ncid, int varid, const double *op);
int nc_get_var_double (int ncid, int varid,       double *ip);
int nc_put_var1_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const char *op);
int nc_get_var1_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       char *ip);
int nc_put_var1_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const unsigned char *op);
int nc_get_var1_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       unsigned char *ip);
int nc_put_var1_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const signed char *op);
int nc_get_var1_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       signed char *ip);
int nc_put_var1_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const short *op);
int nc_get_var1_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       short *ip);
int nc_put_var1_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const int *op);
int nc_get_var1_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       int *ip);
int nc_put_var1_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const long *op);
int nc_get_var1_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       long *ip);
int nc_put_var1_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const float *op); 
int nc_get_var1_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       float *ip); 
int nc_put_var1_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       const double *op);
int nc_get_var1_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *indexp,
                       double *ip);
int nc_put_vara_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const char *op);
int nc_get_vara_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, char *ip);
int nc_put_vara_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const unsigned char *op);
int nc_get_vara_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, unsigned char *ip);
int nc_put_vara_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const signed char *op);
int nc_get_vara_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, signed char *ip);
int nc_put_vara_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const short *op);
int nc_get_vara_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, short *ip);
int nc_put_vara_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const int *op);
int nc_get_vara_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, int *ip);
int nc_put_vara_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const long *op);
int nc_get_vara_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, long *ip);
int nc_put_vara_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const float *op);
int nc_get_vara_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, float *ip);
int nc_put_vara_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const double *op);
int nc_get_vara_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, double *ip);
int nc_put_vars_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const char *op);
int nc_get_vars_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       char *ip);
int nc_put_vars_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const unsigned char *op);
int nc_get_vars_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       unsigned char *ip);
int nc_put_vars_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const signed char *op);
int nc_get_vars_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       signed char *ip);
int nc_put_vars_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const short *op);
int nc_get_vars_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       short *ip);
int nc_put_vars_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const int *op);
int nc_get_vars_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       int *ip);
int nc_put_vars_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const long *op);
int nc_get_vars_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       long *ip);
int nc_put_vars_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const float *op);
int nc_get_vars_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       float *ip);
int nc_put_vars_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const double *op);
int nc_get_vars_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       double *ip);
int nc_put_varm_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const char *op);
int nc_get_varm_text  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, char *ip);
int nc_put_varm_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const unsigned char *op);
int nc_get_varm_uchar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, unsigned char *ip);
int nc_put_varm_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const signed char *op);
int nc_get_varm_schar (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, signed char *ip);
int nc_put_varm_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const short *op);
int nc_get_varm_short (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, short *ip);
int nc_put_varm_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const int *op);
int nc_get_varm_int   (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, int *ip);
int nc_put_varm_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const long *op);
int nc_get_varm_long  (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, long *ip);
int nc_put_varm_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const float *op);
int nc_get_varm_float (int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, float *ip);
int nc_put_varm_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp,
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep,
                       const ptrdiff_t *imapp, const double *op);  
int nc_get_varm_double(int ncid, int varid, const size_t *startp, 
                       const size_t *countp, const ptrdiff_t *stridep, 
                       const ptrdiff_t * imap, double *ip);

int nc_inq_att        (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type *xtypep, size_t *lenp);
int nc_inq_attid      (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, int *idp);
int nc_inq_atttype    (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type *xtypep);
int nc_inq_attlen     (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       size_t *lenp);
int nc_inq_attname    (int ncid, int varid, int attnum, char *name);
int nc_copy_att       (int ncid_in, int varid_in, const char *name,
                       int ncid_out, int varid_out);
int nc_rename_att     (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       const char *newname);
int nc_del_att        (int ncid, int varid, const char *name);
int nc_put_att_text   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, size_t len,
                       const char *op);
int nc_get_att_text   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, char *ip);
int nc_put_att_uchar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const unsigned char *op);
int nc_get_att_uchar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       unsigned char *ip);
int nc_put_att_schar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const signed char *op);
int nc_get_att_schar  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       signed char *ip);
int nc_put_att_short  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const short *op);
int nc_get_att_short  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, short *ip);
int nc_put_att_int    (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype,size_t len, const int *op);
int nc_get_att_int    (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, int *ip);
int nc_put_att_long   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const long *op);
int nc_get_att_long   (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, long *ip);
int nc_put_att_float  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                        nc_type xtype, size_t len, const float *op);
int nc_get_att_float  (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, float *ip);
int nc_put_att_double (int ncid, int varid, const char *name,
                       nc_type xtype, size_t len, const double *op);
int nc_get_att_double (int ncid, int varid, const char *name, 
                       double *ip);
@end example

@node NetCDF 2 C Transition Guide, Error Codes, Summary of C Interface, Top
@appendix NetCDF 2 C Transition Guide
@cindex backward compatibility with v2 API
@cindex zero length edge
@cindex zero valued count vector
@cindex XDR library
@cindex netCDF 2 transition guide
@cindex transition guide, netCDF 2

@section Overview of C interface changes

NetCDF version 3 includes a complete rewrite of the netCDF library. It
is about twice as fast as the previous version. The netCDF file format
is unchanged, so files written with version 3 can be read with version
2 code and vice versa.

The core library is now written in ANSI C. For example, prototypes are
used throughout as well as const qualifiers where appropriate. You
must have an ANSI C compiler to compile this version.

Rewriting the library offered an opportunity to implement improved C
and FORTRAN interfaces that provide some significant benefits:

type safety, by eliminating the need to use generic void* pointers;

automatic type conversions, by eliminating the undesirable coupling
between the language-independent external netCDF types (NC_BYTE, ...,
NC_DOUBLE) and language-dependent internal data types (char, ...,
double);

support for future enhancements, by eliminating obstacles to the clean
addition of support for packed data and multithreading;

more standard error behavior, by uniformly communicating an error
status back to the calling program in the return value of each
function.

It is not necessary to rewrite programs that use the version 2 C
interface, because the netCDF-3 library includes a backward
compatibility interface that supports all the old functions, globals,
and behavior. We are hoping that the benefits of the new interface
will be an incentive to use it in new netCDF applications. It is
possible to convert old applications to the new interface
incrementally, replacing netCDF-2 calls with the corresponding
netCDF-3 calls one at a time. If you want to check that only netCDF-3
calls are used in an application, a preprocessor macro (NO_NETCDF_2)
is available for that purpose.

Other changes in the implementation of netCDF result in improved
portability, maintainability, and performance on most platforms. A
clean separation between I/O and type layers facilitates
platform-specific optimizations. The new library no longer uses a
vendor-provided XDR library, which simplifies linking programs that
use netCDF and speeds up data access significantly in most cases.

@section The New C Interface

First, here's an example of C code that uses the netCDF-2 interface:

@example
void *bufferp;
nc_type xtype;
ncvarinq(ncid, varid, ..., &xtype, ...
...
/* allocate bufferp based on dimensions and type */
...
if (ncvarget(ncid, varid, start, count, bufferp) == -1) @{
    fprintf(stderr, "Can't get data, error code = %d\n",ncerr);
    /* deal with it */
    ...
@}
switch(xtype) @{
    /* deal with the data, according to type */
...
case  NC_FLOAT:
    fanalyze((float *)bufferp);
    break;
case NC_DOUBLE:
    danalyze((double *)bufferp);
    break;
@}
@end example

Here's how you might handle this with the new netCDF-3 C interface:

@example
/*
 * I want to use doubles for my analysis.
 */
double dbuf[NDOUBLES];
int status;

/* So, I use the function that gets the data as doubles. */
status = nc_get_vara_double(ncid, varid, start, count, dbuf)
if (status != NC_NOERR) @{
   fprintf(stderr, "Can't get data: %s\n", nc_strerror(status));
    /* deal with it */
    ...
@}
danalyze(dbuf);
@end example

The example above illustrates changes in function names, data type
conversion, and error handling, discussed in detail in the sections
below.

@section Function Naming Conventions

The netCDF-3 C library employs a new naming convention, intended to
make netCDF programs more readable. For example, the name of the
function to rename a variable is now nc_rename_var instead of the
previous ncvarrename.

All netCDF-3 C function names begin with the nc_ prefix. The second
part of the name is a verb, like get, put, inq (for inquire), or
open. The third part of the name is typically the object of the verb:
for example dim, var, or att for functions dealing with dimensions,
variables, or attributes. To distinguish the various I/O operations
for variables, a single character modifier is appended to var:

var entire variable access 
var1 single value access 
vara array or array section access 
vars strided access to a subsample of values 
varm mapped access to values not contiguous in memory 

At the end of the name for variable and attribute functions, there is
a component indicating the type of the final argument: text, uchar,
schar, short, int, long, float, or double. This part of the function
name indicates the type of the data container you are using in your
program: character string, unsigned char, signed char, and so on.

Also, all macro names in the public C interface begin with the prefix
NC_. For example, the macro which was formerly MAX_NC_NAME is now
NC_MAX_NAME, and the former FILL_FLOAT is now NC_FILL_FLOAT.

As previously mentioned, all the old names are still supported for
backward compatibility.

@section Type Conversion

With the new interface, users need not be aware of the external type
of numeric variables, since automatic conversion to or from any
desired numeric type is now available. You can use this feature to
simplify code, by making it independent of external types. The
elimination of void* pointers provides detection of type errors at
compile time that could not be detected with the previous
interface. Programs may be made more robust with the new interface,
because they need not be changed to accommodate a change to the
external type of a variable.

If conversion to or from an external numeric type is necessary, it is
handled by the library. This automatic conversion and separation of
external data representation from internal data types will become even
more important in netCDF version 4, when new external types will be
added for packed data for which there is no natural corresponding
internal type, for example, arrays of 11-bit values.

Converting from one numeric type to another may result in an error if
the target type is not capable of representing the converted
value. (In netCDF-2, such overflows can only happen in the XDR layer.)
For example, a float may not be able to hold data stored externally as
an NC_DOUBLE (an IEEE floating-point number). When accessing an array
of values, an NC_ERANGE error is returned if one or more values are
out of the range of representable values, but other values are
converted properly.

Note that mere loss of precision in type conversion does not return an
error. Thus, if you read double precision values into an int, for
example, no error results unless the magnitude of the double precision
value exceeds the representable range of ints on your
platform. Similarly, if you read a large integer into a float
incapable of representing all the bits of the integer in its mantissa,
this loss of precision will not result in an error. If you want to
avoid such precision loss, check the external types of the variables
you access to make sure you use an internal type that has a compatible
precision.

The new interface distinguishes arrays of characters intended to
represent text strings from arrays of 8-bit bytes intended to
represent small integers. The interface supports the internal types
text, uchar, and schar, intended for text strings, unsigned byte
values, and signed byte values.

The _uchar and _schar functions were introduced in netCDF-3 to
eliminate an ambiguity, and support both signed and unsigned byte
data. In netCDF-2, whether the external NC_BYTE type represented
signed or unsigned values was left up to the user. In netcdf-3, we
treat NC_BYTE as signed for the purposes of conversion to short, int,
long, float, or double. (Of course, no conversion takes place when the
internal type is signed char.) In the _uchar functions, we treat
NC_BYTE as if it were unsigned. Thus, no NC_ERANGE error can occur
converting between NC_BYTE and unsigned char.

@section Error handling

The new interface handles errors differently than netCDF-2. In the old
interface, the default behavior when an error was detected was to
print an error message and exit. To get control of error handling, you
had to set flag bits in a global variable, ncopts, and to determine
the cause of an error, you had to test the value of another global
variable ncerr.

In the new interface, functions return an integer status that
indicates not only success or failure, but also the cause of the
error. The global variables ncerr and ncopt have been eliminated. The
library will never try to print anything, nor will it call exit
(unless you are using the netCDF version 2 compatibility
functions). You will have to check the function return status and do
this yourself. We eliminated these globals in the interest of
supporting parallel (multiprocessor) execution cleanly, as well as
reducing the number of assumptions about the environment where netCDF
is used. The new behavior should provide better support for using
netCDF as a hidden layer in applications that have their own GUI
interface.

@section NC_LONG and NC_INT 

Where the netCDF-2 interface used NC_LONG to
identify an external data type corresponding to 32-bit integers, the
new interface uses NC_INT instead. NC_LONG is defined to have the same
value as NC_INT for backward compatibility, but it should not be used
in new code. With new 64-bit platforms using long for 64-bit integers,
we would like to reduce the confusion caused by this name clash. Note
that there is still no netCDF external data type corresponding to
64-bit integers.

@section What's Missing?  

The new C interface omits three "record I/O" functions, ncrecput,
ncrecget, and ncrecinq, from the netCDF-2 interface, although these
functions are still supported via the netCDF-2 compatibility
interface.

This means you may have to replace one record-oriented call with
multiple type-specific calls, one for each record variable. For
example, a single call to ncrecput can always be replaced by multiple
calls to the appropriate nc_put_var functions, one call for each
variable accessed. The record-oriented functions were omitted, because
there is no simple way to provide type-safety and automatic type
conversion for such an interface.

There is no function corresponding to the nctypelen function from the
version 2 interface. The separation of internal and external types and
the new type-conversion interfaces make nctypelen unnecessary. Since
users read into and write out of native types, the sizeof operator is
perfectly adequate to determine how much space to allocate for a
value.

In the previous library, there was no checking that the characters
used in the name of a netCDF object were compatible with CDL
restrictions. The ncdump and ncgen utilities that use CDL permit only
alphanumeric characters, "_" and "-" in names. Now this restriction is
also enforced by the library for creation of new dimensions,
variables, and attributes. Previously existing components with less
restrictive names will still work OK.

@section Other Changes 

There are two new functions in netCDF-3 that don't
correspond to any netCDF-2 functions: nc_inq_libvers and
nc_strerror. The version of the netCDF library in use is returned as a
string by nc_inq_libvers. An error message corresponding to the status
returned by a netCDF function call is returned as a string by the
nc_strerror function.

A new NC_SHARE flag is available for use in an nc_open or nc_create
call, to suppress the default buffering of accesses. The use of
NC_SHARE for concurrent access to a netCDF dataset means you don't
have to call nc_sync after every access to make sure that disk updates
are synchronous. It is important to note that changes to ancillary
data, such as attribute values, are not propagated automatically by
use of the NC_SHARE flag. Use of the nc_sync function is still
required for this purpose.

The version 2 interface had a single inquiry function, ncvarinq for
getting the name, type, and shape of a variable. Similarly, only a
single inquiry function was available for getting information about a
dimension, an attribute, or a netCDF dataset. When you only wanted a
subset of this information, you had to provide NULL arguments as
placeholders for the unneeded information. The new interface includes
additional inquire functions that return each item separately, so
errors are less likely from miscounting arguments.

The previous implementation returned an error when 0-valued count
components were specified in ncvarput and ncvarget calls. This
restriction has been removed, so that now functions in the nc_put_var
and nc_get_var families may be called with 0-valued count components,
resulting in no data being accessed. Although this may seem useless,
it simplifies some programs to not treat 0-valued counts as a special
case.

The previous implementation returned an error when the same dimension
was used more than once in specifying the shape of a variable in
ncvardef. This restriction is relaxed in the netCDF-3 implementation,
because an autocorrelation matrix is a good example where using the
same dimension twice makes sense.

In the new interface, units for the imap argument to the nc_put_varm
and nc_get_varm families of functions are now in terms of the number
of data elements of the desired internal type, not in terms of bytes
as in the netCDF version-2 mapped access interfaces.

Following is a table of netCDF-2 function names and names of the
corresponding netCDF-3 functions. For parameter lists of netCDF-2
functions, see the netCDF-2 User's Guide.

@table @code

@item ncabort
nc_abort
 
@item ncattcopy
nc_copy_att
 
@item ncattdel
nc_del_att
 
@item ncattget
nc_get_att_double, nc_get_att_float, nc_get_att_int, nc_get_att_long,
nc_get_att_schar, nc_get_att_short, nc_get_att_text, nc_get_att_uchar
 
@item ncattinq
nc_inq_att, nc_inq_attid, nc_inq_attlen, nc_inq_atttype
 
@item ncattname
nc_inq_attname
 
@item ncattput
nc_put_att_double, nc_put_att_float, nc_put_att_int, nc_put_att_long,
nc_put_att_schar, nc_put_att_short, nc_put_att_text, nc_put_att_uchar
 
@item ncattrename
nc_rename_att
 
@item ncclose
nc_close
 
@item nccreate
nc_create
 
@item ncdimdef
nc_def_dim
 
@item ncdimid
nc_inq_dimid
 
@item ncdiminq
nc_inq_dim, nc_inq_dimlen, nc_inq_dimname
 
@item ncdimrename
nc_rename_dim
 
@item ncendef
nc_enddef
 
@item ncinquire
nc_inq, nc_inq_natts, nc_inq_ndims, nc_inq_nvars, nc_inq_unlimdim
 
@item ncopen
nc_open
 
@item ncrecget
(none)
 
@item ncrecinq
(none)
 
@item ncrecput
(none)
 
@item ncredef
nc_redef
 
@item ncsetfill
nc_set_fill
 
@item ncsync
nc_sync
 
@item nctypelen
(none)
 
@item ncvardef
nc_def_var
 
@item ncvarget
nc_get_vara_double, nc_get_vara_float, nc_get_vara_int,
nc_get_vara_long, nc_get_vara_schar, nc_get_vara_short,
nc_get_vara_text, nc_get_vara_uchar
 
@item ncvarget1
nc_get_var1_double, nc_get_var1_float, nc_get_var1_int,
nc_get_var1_long, nc_get_var1_schar, nc_get_var1_short,
nc_get_var1_text, nc_get_var1_uchar
 
@item ncvargetg
nc_get_varm_double, nc_get_varm_float, nc_get_varm_int,
nc_get_varm_long, nc_get_varm_schar, nc_get_varm_short,
nc_get_varm_text, nc_get_varm_uchar, nc_get_vars_double,
nc_get_vars_float, nc_get_vars_int, nc_get_vars_long,
nc_get_vars_schar, nc_get_vars_short, nc_get_vars_text,
nc_get_vars_uchar
 
@item ncvarid
nc_inq_varid
 
@item ncvarinq
nc_inq_var, nc_inq_vardimid, nc_inq_varname, nc_inq_varnatts,
nc_inq_varndims, nc_inq_vartype
 
@item ncvarput
nc_put_vara_double, nc_put_vara_float, nc_put_vara_int,
nc_put_vara_long, nc_put_vara_schar, nc_put_vara_short,
nc_put_vara_text, nc_put_vara_uchar
 
@item ncvarput1
nc_put_var1_double, nc_put_var1_float, nc_put_var1_int,
nc_put_var1_long, nc_put_var1_schar, nc_put_var1_short,
nc_put_var1_text, nc_put_var1_uchar
 
@item ncvarputg
nc_put_varm_double, nc_put_varm_float, nc_put_varm_int,
nc_put_varm_long, nc_put_varm_schar, nc_put_varm_short,
nc_put_varm_text, nc_put_varm_uchar, nc_put_vars_double,
nc_put_vars_float, nc_put_vars_int, nc_put_vars_long,
nc_put_vars_schar, nc_put_vars_short, nc_put_vars_text,
nc_put_vars_uchar
 
@item ncvarrename
nc_rename_var
 
@item (none)
nc_inq_libvers
 
@item (none)
nc_strerror

@end table

@node Error Codes, Combined Index, NetCDF 2 C Transition Guide, Top
@appendix Error Codes
@cindex error codes, list
@cindex list of error codes

@example
#define NC_NOERR        0       /* No Error */

#define NC_EBADID       (-33)   /* Not a netcdf id */
#define NC_ENFILE       (-34)   /* Too many netcdfs open */
#define NC_EEXIST       (-35)   /* netcdf file exists && NC_NOCLOBBER */
#define NC_EINVAL       (-36)   /* Invalid Argument */
#define NC_EPERM        (-37)   /* Write to read only */
#define NC_ENOTINDEFINE (-38)   /* Operation not allowed in data mode */
#define NC_EINDEFINE    (-39)   /* Operation not allowed in define mode */
#define NC_EINVALCOORDS (-40)   /* Index exceeds dimension bound */
#define NC_EMAXDIMS     (-41)   /* NC_MAX_DIMS exceeded */
#define NC_ENAMEINUSE   (-42)   /* String match to name in use */
#define NC_ENOTATT      (-43)   /* Attribute not found */
#define NC_EMAXATTS     (-44)   /* NC_MAX_ATTRS exceeded */
#define NC_EBADTYPE     (-45)   /* Not a netcdf data type */
#define NC_EBADDIM      (-46)   /* Invalid dimension id or name */
#define NC_EUNLIMPOS    (-47)   /* NC_UNLIMITED in the wrong index */
#define NC_EMAXVARS     (-48)   /* NC_MAX_VARS exceeded */
#define NC_ENOTVAR      (-49)   /* Variable not found */
#define NC_EGLOBAL      (-50)   /* Action prohibited on NC_GLOBAL varid */
#define NC_ENOTNC       (-51)   /* Not a netcdf file */
#define NC_ESTS         (-52)   /* In Fortran, string too short */
#define NC_EMAXNAME     (-53)   /* NC_MAX_NAME exceeded */
#define NC_EUNLIMIT     (-54)   /* NC_UNLIMITED size already in use */
#define NC_ENORECVARS   (-55)   /* nc_rec op when there are no record vars */
#define NC_ECHAR        (-56)   /* Attempt to convert between text & numbers */
#define NC_EEDGE        (-57)   /* Edge+start exceeds dimension bound */
#define NC_ESTRIDE      (-58)   /* Illegal stride */
#define NC_EBADNAME     (-59)   /* Attribute or variable name
                                         contains illegal characters */
/* N.B. following must match value in ncx.h */
#define NC_ERANGE       (-60)   /* Math result not representable */
#define NC_ENOMEM       (-61)   /* Memory allocation (malloc) failure */

#define NC_EVARSIZE     (-62)   /* One or more variable sizes violate
                                   format constraints */ 
#define NC_EDIMSIZE     (-63)   /* Invalid dimension size */
#define NC_ETRUNC       (-64)   /* File likely truncated or possibly corrupted */
@end example

@node Combined Index,  , Error Codes, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
End:
